# Academic Passion

## Essay: "J. Paul Getty Museum"
> **Author:** Sumaya Quillian | **Accepted by:** UCLA and UC Santa Barbara

I WAS RAISED AT THE J. Paul Getty Museum, or at least I felt like I was and I loved it. My dad worked there for ten years from the time I was two years old, and some of my earliest memories are in that museum. When I was in elementary school, my parents and I went there almost every weekend so my dad could get more work done. I loved everything about the Getty, travertine buildings and all. The offices had huge windows overlooking the mountains that let in brilliant sunlight. My mom and I would play hide-and-seek outside my dad's office, and we would run through the dozens of cubicles that formed a maze. With special permission, I was allowed to eat a sugar cube or two from the kitchen. More often than not, I would sneak a few extra ones when my parents were not looking.

Then there was the art. My mom and I spent most of our afternoons at the Getty looking at the collections. I had to see all my favorites each time, the portrait of Maria Frederike, the eighteenth century French canopy bed, and the oil painting of Princess Leonilla. Even now, I remember most of the exhibitions that I saw; everything from the sculptures of Jean-Antoine Houdon to the watercolor paintings of Paul Cézanne. Walking through the Central Garden was my favorite way to end the day. There were some days in the spring when the sky was a vivid shade of blue, every plant was in full bloom, and being in that garden felt magical. Few kids can say that they have their own museum, but the Getty is mine, and no one can tell me differently.

When my dad left the Getty to take a new job, I thought I was going to lose a part of myself after ten years. Until high school, I did not realize that I could never lose my museum, and I could never lose the passion that I gained for the arts. After all the times I spent at the Getty, I saw the incredible works that people can create. I was able to see the heights of creativity and intellect come alive, and the art inspired those things in me. Even though I am not an artist, I hope to be always immersed in the arts; visiting renowned museums around the world, hearing symphonies perform in concerts, and seeing dramatic works on the stage.

## Analysis
Not many of us got to grow up playing in the Getty Museum, and in some ways it might seem like Sumaya has an incredible advantage in this experience alone. But the way in which Sumaya discusses her experience emphasizes her childhood curiosity and joy, rather than privileged access to art and culture, and she is able to take away an understanding of her relationship to art that extends to all areas of her life—the essay is much more about Sumaya's childhood curiosity and her ongoing appreciation for art wherever she can find it, rather than special access to the Getty.

Sumaya wonderfully recaptures the sense of the joys of childhood, mundane and spectacular alike. She begins, for instance, her account of her weekends spent at the Getty with her father by focusing on, of all things, his office—the huge windows, the view, the cubicles and the sugar cubes. She lavishes description on these things, and the reader understands just what an exciting place even this office was to young Sumaya: "The offices had huge windows overlooking the mountains that baked in the brilliant afternoon sun. My mom and I played hide-and-seek in the maze of cubicles outside my dad's office."

The fact that there is a museum attached to the office becomes almost an afterthought: "Then there was the art." The way in which Sumaya specifies her favorite pieces and recounts how "I had to see all my favorites each time" really captures the experience through a child's perspective—the childlike listing of her favorites and the almost petulant insistence that she see them even mimics a child in tone.

For Sumaya the Getty as a whole is an experience—the office, the view, the gardens, as well as the art. We understand the importance of art to her not only as something she appreciates viewing, but as a part of a greater experience of childhood curiosity and connection to her family.

Most importantly, Sumaya takes this experience and applies it to her broader life in a very organic way: we understand from the first two paragraphs of the essay just how integral the experience of the Getty, specifically, is to Sumaya's life, and when her father takes a new job, we can understand her bewilderment and sense of loss—until she recognizes that her experiences at the Getty have left her with an appreciation for art and creativity that is in no way limited to that museum alone. In making the reader see vividly exactly how important every aspect of the Getty was to Sumaya, in lavishing detail on even the most mundane of memories, we understand that the Getty and its art was truly a part of Sumaya, and how she still carries with her the same appreciation even after her link to the Getty is severed.

## Essay: "Ocean Institute"
> **Author:** Hayley Ritterhern | **Accepted by:** UCLA and UCSD
> **Prompt:** Personal quality, talent, accomplishment, contribution or experience

IN 6TH GRADE, BEFORE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL suffered major budget cuts, my school was asked to appoint students as trainees with the Ocean Institute (OI) in Dana Point, California. My demonstrated interest in science won me the coveted representative spot from my class. At age 11, I stood confidently before a crowd of visitors as a student docent and proudly told them about the gastric pouches on the moon jelly ("they turn pink when they're full of yummy brine shrimp!"). That was not the first time I realized how interesting it is to experience science hands-on, but it was the first time I discovered how much satisfaction I received from sharing that unique knowledge with others. Now I love explaining cool science information that most people don't know, to people that tend to be awed by the things I show them.

At the requisite age of 14, I applied to become a Public Programs docent and have remained committed to OI ever since. My docent experience allowed me to work on the maintenance of the Remote Operated Vehicle (ROV) exhibit under the care of the sea-worn engineer. At first I didn't know the difference between a screw driver and a hammer, but eventually I plunked the renovated ROV in the water and it buzzed around good as new. The kids waiting patiently lit up in smiles as they tried to maneuver the ROV's camera to look at our faux deep sea life in the tank. For the first time, I saw the important connection between engineering and biology, which pushed me to apply for the Rose-Hulman research internship on biomedical engineering.

My docent position allows me the opportunity to continue sharing my excitement about ocean awareness. Whether teaching people about the two-spot octopus, and why there is a Mr. Potato-Head in its tank (enrichment toy for food!), or working alongside researchers in our labs, I love seeing the visitors' looks when they discover crazy little quirks about our ocean life. Their reactions led me to brainstorm ways for more students to visit the institute. I initiated "Operation Environmental Outreach," to fundraise and organize for a class in an underprivileged Hispanic neighborhood to come down to the OI and participate in a science curriculum enrichment program. With the assistance of the chapter of the Science National Honor Society which I established at my high school, I hope to see this project grow each year.

The experience of working at the OI validated my predisposition for science in general, and my philosophy about spreading information about ocean awareness to our community. Whether it was tinkering away on a new ROV to explore ocean life, or witnessing the birth of a baby skate, the Ocean Institute has inspired me to continue pursuing the bridge between engineering and lives of organisms. I cherish my memories of the sea life I observed and the children I have met who inspire me to keep sharing my quirky love of science!

## Analysis
Hayley's essay chronicles the development of a student with true intellectual vitality. Hayley is able to take a passion she discovered in 6th grade and devote herself to it throughout her entire high school career. This commitment to a single academic project is impressive, but Hayley goes beyond being a well-developed scholar. She also commits herself to educating those around her, and thus creating an academic community.

The essay opens with an anecdote about how Hayley got involved in OI in 6th grade. This story gives us background on the type of student Hayley is. Even at a young age, Hayley impressively possesses a "demonstrated interest in science." Furthermore, Hayley demonstrates the extent of her self-proclaimed "interest in science" by describing her first time as a docent in the OI. Hayley talks about the specific knowledge she attained, but the language she uses is not overly technical. Instead, she re-creates the words of an 11 year-old girl, delighted by her work. Hayley's parenthetical about moon jelly pouches ("they turn pink when they're full of yummy brine shrimp!") gives the reader a sense of Hayley's voice and a taste of her genuine love of oceanography.

Hayley continues to do this throughout the essay. She invites the reader into her head, giving us a sense of how she thinks and what facts she finds exciting. These parentheticals are spread evenly throughout the essay so they do not become overwhelming. Instead, they act to constantly remind the reader that Hayley is being sincere with her descriptions.

The essay carefully describes how Hayley used each of her experiences at OI to become more engaged in her academic community. Her work with the ROV inspired her to try biomedical engineering with the Rose-Hulman research internship. Likewise her love of teaching others while being a docent inspired her to start Operation Environmental Outreach. This information gives context as to how Hayley became involved in the activities that are already listed on her application. Furthermore, it suggests that Hayley possesses the initiative to take what she is doing and engage in it in new and dynamic ways. Hayley proves that she enjoys constantly acquiring new skills, cultivating her interests and building upon those interests to seek new challenges.

Still, even when listing her multiple projects, this essay doesn't read like a brag sheet. Instead of simply describing all of her accomplishments and discussing why she became involved, Hayley tells a story. We watch as she moves from one thing to another, constantly being driven by her passion to share knowledge with others. In every single paragraph, Hayley mentions how important it was to her that she was able to inspire kids, excite adults or otherwise engage others in her academic pursuits. These details depict Hayley as a student who is motivated purely by academic enrichment in all of its forms. The result is a well-written essay that successfully illustrates Hayley as a student who thrives in the creation of an engaging academic community.

## Essay: "Book"
> **Author:** Jessica R. Weinman | **Accepted by:** UCLA
> **Prompt:** Personal quality, talent, accomplishment, contribution or experience

MY EXPERIENCE WITH BOOKS STARTED WHEN I was in elementary school. We were learning, as children do in the primary grades, how to read and write. I had no particular love of reading; I just saw it as something I had to do for school. I went on this way into middle school. One day, my mom wanted to stop at the bookstore for a cookbook. I found myself wandering around the kid's section. This was when I saw the Harry Potter book display. I, like many others, had seen the first Harry Potter movie. I thought it was a good story, but I wasn't really interested in it. This day, I picked up the book, turned the first pages, and landed on the dedication page. It said, "For Jessica, who loves stories."

Of course, I am not the Jessica that the author was speaking of, but imagine my surprise. It was almost as if the book were speaking specifically to me. I went on to read the first chapter, barely hearing my mom when she told me it was time to leave. I had discovered the main difference between the written word and movies; my own imagination. I found that what an individual brings to a story, his or her unique background, makes the same story different for each person. This was when my passion for reading first came to light. Books change me because I continue to think about them long after I have finished reading them; few movies have this lasting effect. Books teach things that aren't always in a curriculum, that really make me think. Science fiction and fantasy can show me cultures and places that may never exist, while nonfiction teaches me about cultures and places that do exist.

This led to my headfirst dive into fiction of all kinds, sparking my passion for reading. My love for words is now a personal quality that I know will never leave me. As I think back to the differences between books and movies, I realized that I also learned to be open-minded from this experience, and now I try not to shut out new ideas. This has extended from books to magazine, newspapers, and articles that can be found all over the internet. Any critical thinking skills I have can be attributed to my time spent online, rummaging through articles to ferret out an interesting, or important, or factually correct article.

This is now seen as a strength of mine by many people I know. Not only do I read quickly and thoroughly, but I also read many genres, such as science fiction, fantasy, and nonfiction of all kinds. When someone is looking for a new book to read, they usually ask for my opinion. I have often been told that my suggestions helped someone to find a new series or genre that they liked. Then, they come back to ask for more advice and share their favorite books in turn, which expands my outlook even more. I feel very proud that my peers respect my literary opinions.

Reading has changed me as a person, from little references I make when I speak, my vocabulary, and trivia to the way I think and look at the world. I know that reading will be a lifelong passion of mine.

## Analysis
This essay about a passion for books stands out from the crowd of essays on the same theme. While Jessica does make some generic statements ("I found that what an individual brings to a story, his or her unique background, makes the same story different for each person;" "My love for words is now a personal quality that I know will never leave me."), she provides meaty evidence to back them up. Her clear writing and use of details gives this essay heft and reveal her personality. These techniques separate her essay from one that deals in generalities about why reading is great and make it ring true.

Jessica begins this essay with a vignette that includes a vivid surprise at the end. The striking coincidence that J.K. Rowling dedicated her book to another Jessica catches the reader's attention just as much as it did young Jessica's. It may have made the essay even stronger to begin with this story, rather than opening with a description of the very beginning of her reading history.

Jessica enlivens her essay by fleshing out exactly what she enjoys about reading. She notes, "Books change me because I continue to think about them long after I have finished reading them; few movies have this lasting effect." In this sentence, she employs a simple and direct writing style to make an insightful observation about her reading experience. This sentence provides much more information than would the statement "Books change me" on its own; Jessica's version adds content to an otherwise pat declaration. She goes on to detail what appeals to her about science fiction and nonfiction, respectively, further elucidating why she reads.

Jessica uses her description of herself as a reader to communicate who she is as a person. She mentions how reading activates her imagination and teaches her to be "open-minded" and fosters her "critical thinking skills." Not only that, but she shows how important reading is to her identity by explaining that her social circle recognizes her expertise: "When someone is looking for a new book to read, they usually ask for my opinion." Her comments about the trading book suggestions and opinions underscores her intellectual curiosity and ability to learn from others. All of these qualities are crucial to success in college, no matter one's field of study.

Jessica's conclusion provides some good details about ways large and small in which reading has affected her: "from little references I make when I speak, my vocabulary, and trivia to the way I think and look at the world." Though this sentence could use some polishing to improve its grammatical structure, it is more effective than her final line because it is more detailed and original. It could stand on its own without the last line as a conclusion to an essay that reveals a student who engages as actively and openly with life as she does with reading.

## Essay: "Desires for Knowledge"
> **Author:** Kris Thompson | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UC Irvine and UC San Diego

JUST LAST WEEK, MY PHYSICS TEACHER introduced the revolutionary (and often times quite complicating) theory in which time is relative to the speed at which one travels.

Up until this point, Special Relativity was only a subject in a Calvin and Hobbes comic strip from years ago. This prompted a discussion with my friends, all of whom were as interested in the subject as I, wherein the common conception of time being the fourth dimension came about. I had to wonder: since we live in a dimension consisting of three spatial dimensions plus the dimension of time, are there more dimensions out there? If one existed in a universe of greater dimensions, it seems possible that time would not play as significant a figure.

Such an experience of timelessness, as it were, would be personally fascinating; for, it always seems as though there is never enough time. As cliché as it may seem, many memories of mine do indeed seem like they occurred yesterday and though I may only be a 17 year-old student, I can still remember first entering high school as a freshman. I can remember the day I got my first dog back in the third grade. Yet, here I am, on the brink of entering a university. It just seems though there is never enough time to truly experience all the wondrous things in life. And so, to even imagine that there may exist a place wherein a continuous feeling of nostalgia is possible, is in my opinion quite exciting.

## Analysis
Questions asking applicants to expound on their own intellectual interests may seem like an opportunity to show off knowledge, but savvy applicants know that there's much more at stake than simply demonstrating how much they know or how deep their knowledge of one particular subject goes. In this short answer essay, Kris economizes on space by leaving the concept of special relativity a fairly nebulous one (which reinforces the reader's sense, as Kris says, of its "complicating" and "fascinating" nature). Rather than trying to explain a complex concept, he focuses both on the way that he and his friends approach novel concepts and new subjects, and on his thought experiments, in which he applies the theory to his own life and experiences.

In mentioning the conversations he has with his friends about special relativity, Kris is able to illustrate a lively intellectual milieu among his friends outside of school, suggesting that his scientific curiosity and academic thinking extend beyond the classroom. The question that the discussion leaves him with ("since we live in a dimension consisting of three spatial dimensions plus the dimension of time, are there more dimensions out there?") and his proposed answer ("If one existed in a universe of greater dimensions, it seems possible that time would not play as significant a figure.") may or may not be a particularly nuanced application of special relativity—which one wouldn't expect or demand from a seventeen-year-old! However, it does demonstrate Kris' curiosity and his desire to seek further knowledge, to hypothesize based on theories and existing knowledge and to examine the hypotheses he formulates.

Kris then leaves the nuts-and-bolts world of physics and his own musings on the possibilities the theory of special relativity entails and he brings it into his own life—he recalls major events in his life, such as getting his first dog and entering high school, emphasizing and thus juxtaposing both his relative distance in time from these events as well as the sentimental proximity he feels for them. Space permitting, Kris could benefit here from some specific and more personal details about these events, particularly since he wants to evoke the nostalgia he feels when he reflects on them, but despite the relative impersonality with which he treats them, he still communicates his ability to expand on academic theories and concepts and examine them in light of their personal significance to him and his own life and experiences. He ends with a slightly fantastical notion, envisioning a timeless world, "wherein a continuous feeling of nostalgia is possible," which leaves the reader with a sense of Kris' strong imagination, backed by pervasive and thoughtful academic curiosity.

## Essay: "World"
> **Author:** Jessica R. Weinman | **Accepted by:** UCLA
> **Prompt:** Describe the world you come from and how your world has shaped you

MY WORLD IS SIMILAR TO THE world of many others. My world consists mainly of family, home, and school. The great things about my world are the differences that change the word "home" to "my home," that make me who I am.

My family from the outside might look like an average family; two parents and a sister. But they are more than that to me. These individuals have influenced me throughout my life. They have all been supportive in everything I do. They have encouraged my loves of reading and computers, from reading to me and with me, to listening patiently as I explain the differences between C and C++. We do community service together at Frontline Foundation and eat dinner together almost every night. I've realized that while my family is typical, I am different.

My family is Jewish. I am not. Most children follow their parents' religion, at least until they are older. As an atheist, this schism has changed my outlook toward others. Realizing that what I believed was different from what my parents, sister, cousins, aunts, uncles and grandparents all believed, but not discussing it for years, made me feel like an outsider of sorts, although none of them ever realized it. When my mom found out, she was surprised but supportive. She understands that every individual has a right to her own beliefs, but was nevertheless disappointed that mine were different from hers.

My school is also quite unique. High Tech Los Angeles is not like any other school I have seen. It is smaller, for one thing, so the teachers connect with the students much more easily than those in a large school. HTLA offers no AP classes and very few Honors classes, which makes our curriculum unique from that of LAUSD schools. My school's philosophy is that not being competitive, and just learning for the joy of it, would spark our inquisitive natures. There are no bells; we have to get to class on time without any help or warnings. Technology is integrated into almost every class, so we learn about computers almost subconsciously. I thought I was on my way to being a lawyer, as I had grown up learning bits of law from my parents, when my high school opened my mind to Computer Science and other technologic fields. My school has changed who I am and who I will be.

My newfound love of technology led me to seek out other programs in the field, and that is how I found COSMOS. I went twice, once to UC Irvine and once to UC San Diego. Both programs changed me in different ways. The first time, I learned about independence in general. Having never been away from home, this was a completely new experience for me. It was nice to learn that I can thrive on my own. The second time, I established my passion for computers. At UC San Diego, I learned how to code using the C programming language. This experience reinforced my passion for computers and influenced my dreams and aspirations for the future, which I know will involve some form of technology.

So, yes, my world might look like any other when seen from the outside. From the inside, however, my world is my own.

## Analysis
The strength of Jessica's essay is its detailed articulation of how she found and pursued a passion for computer science. No reader could mistake her sincere zeal for the subject, nor her consistent effort to develop her knowledge of the field. She could have zeroed in on this central topic sooner in the essay, rather than including short explanations of other parts of her world, such as her family and her religion. Nonetheless, she weaves her interest in computers into this seemingly-unrelated information by describing how her family members "have encouraged my loves of reading and computers, from reading to me and with me, to listening patiently as I explain the differences between C and C++."

The paragraph on Jessica's "unique" high tech high school is the heart of this piece. By describing her high school, she explains its strengths and implicitly describes her own skills. Since Jessica goes to a school that enables students to "learn about computers almost subconsciously," readers can assume that she has developed a nearly-subconscious comfort and aptitude with computers. Jessica's enthusiasm for her school conveys her passion for learning and allows her to describe her own important and unusual abilities without overt bragging. At the same time, she gives admissions officers some crucial information about her school to explain something that might otherwise come across as a weakness of her application: she has taken no AP classes and at most a few honors classes. Jessica makes clear that this is due to lack of opportunity rather than lack of motivation, and suggests that her high school's non-competitive environment has "sparked . . . [her] inquisitive nature." Keep in mind that an open-ended essay question is an excellent chance to provide admissions officers with information and justification that does not fit elsewhere in your application. As in this example, it gives you space to provide your own take, in your own words and with your own "spin," on potential red flags in your application.

Jessica also shows how her interests have changed and grown over time. She describes her decision to pursue computer science, despite her family's legal bent and her own initial inclinations in that direction. Including this detail demonstrates that she has come to a mature decision and has the independence of mind to discover her own interests. She also describes how learning to code at COSMOS strengthened her desire to learn more about computer science. The essay highlights her participation in a selective program and her previous experience in a college environment. Beyond simply namedropping this fact, Jessica gives specific details about how each summer at COSMOS affected her growth.

Jessica's essay not only shows her dedication to computer science, but also provides a detailed window into how she became so dedicated to the subject. Along the way, she paints a vivid picture of how her high school experience and her summer learning set her apart from the average applicant.

## Essay: "Academic Preparation"
> **Author:** Stephanie Anderson | **Accepted by:** UCLA and UC Santa Barbara as a transfer student

SINCE MY YOUTH, READING HAS BEEN my greatest passion and joy in life. My mother learned by the time I was eight years old not to buy me books, knowing I would finish them within hours of getting home from the store. I instead took out scores of books from the library at a time. In middle school, I read at least a book a day and even now, my friends know the surest way to my heart is to recommend a new author.

Clearly books are my passion, however since entering college I have studied business and accounting, viewing accounting as a career that would give me reasonable assurance of financial security. It is only recently that I have acknowledged that this path will not assure personal fulfillment. A month ago I finally spoke with a counselor about changing my major to English in order to pursue a career in publishing. I have little practical knowledge in the field, however my unsatisfying experience in other fields of work and my life-long passion for reading have strengthened my resolve to pursue publishing. I am confident that I will find fulfillment in the literary field, and that satisfaction is worth more to me than any salary could provide.

## Analysis
This essay serves a very utilitarian purpose in Stephanie's application: to explain why she has changed her academic goals and pursuits although already on the business and accounting path in college. But rather than seeming like a justification or a defense, Stephanie presents her situation in a very touching and personal way, and secures the reader's sympathy while also offering a brief (necessarily, given the short answer length) glimpse into what makes Stephanie tick as a person.

Stephanie begins with her childhood and her ongoing passion for reading, beginning by telling the reader what she is passionate about, rather than starting out with a justification or explanation. Instead, she offers us a brief and personal view of the joy she took in reading as a child and the joy she continues to find in it. The personal detail, for instance, that her mother had to stop buying books for her and instead get them from the library, or that her friends often recommend new authors to her, also shows us something of Stephanie's family life and her social relationships and the centrality of reading to them. Stephanie might benefit from some more specific details—which new authors, for instance, or which books stand out vividly from childhood?—but overall manages in a few short sentences to convey to us the ongoing pleasure that reading continues to provide to Stephanie in her life.

She contrasts that in her next paragraph with business and accounting, and her considerably less joyful utilitarian observation that "accounting as a career . . . would give me reasonable assurance of financial security." The difference between the flowing and effusive tone with which Stephanie discusses reading and the rather flat and joyless assessment of accounting is fully palpable, and it is with this artful contrast that Stephanie communicates how important, how necessary it was that she choose to pursue her passion rather than a comfortable but thankless salary.

In her third paragraph, Stephanie is frank about her lack of background and experience in her new chosen field, publishing, but the rapport that she has established and the sympathy she has garnered with her readers with her honesty in her first two paragraphs makes her frankness about her inexperience refreshing. Stephanie has already won the reader's confidence by so forcefully and skillfully communicating the contrast between her passion for reading and the lack of fulfillment she finds in accounting that it is no stretch for the reader to feel the same confidence when Stephanie says, "I will find fulfillment in the literary field, and that satisfaction is worth more to me than any salary could provide." Stephanie manages to take what can be viewed as a potential weakness and transforms it, with her noticeable shifts in tones and the personal detail she injects into her stories about reading as a child, into a reason to root for her.
