# Books/Literature

## Essay: "The Champion of the World"
> **Author:** Ben L. | **Accepted by:** UCLA and UC Davis

I DON'T LIKE ENGLISH. I DON'T mean the language; I love speaking English. I mean the class. Since the moment we began to analyze The Phantom Tollbooth in sixth grade, I have never been partial to the subjective examination of literature. I have always been a linear kind of guy; I memorize a sequence of dates in history, I solve for x in algebra. But I never uncover profound meaning within novels—and I thought I never could.

There was a time when I loved to read. Every night and every morning I grabbed my book off the nightstand and immersed myself in adventure. My mom started reading me stories, and I gradually learned to read them myself: Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, James and the Giant Peach, Danny the Champion of the World. When I read for pleasure, I read as much as I wanted, for as long as I wanted, and as fast as I wanted. I was absorbed in and concerned with only the exciting and interesting plot.

That changed. School changed, and homework changed. I went from "read a book for half an hour" to "read The Phantom Tollbooth chapters 6-9, note especially the universal conflict presented on pages 168-173." My reading began to be enforced; my enjoyment and freedom were inhibited. I wanted to read my own book at my own pace. I missed Danny the Champion of the World.

I suppose the primary reason for my dislike of English was my inability to understand it and do well in the class. We read a book, we talked about symbols and motifs and themes and imagery and parallels. I was intimidated! How was I supposed to know that stars represented destiny? I just kept searching for the systematic approach to analysis, the formula to determine symbolism. Why couldn't we just choose a book to read and write a summary of it? Hey, it worked in elementary school.

It is only now that I am beginning to understand that my struggle has been worthwhile. I have come to realize that the skills I have learned as I analyze literature have helped me to think analytically in other areas of my life. I no longer accept political ideas and proposals; I question their purpose. I no longer see a piece of art, admire it, and move on; I probe the thoughts of the artist to determine what he is trying to express. And even though I still dislike analyzing literature, I finally recognize that it teaches me to think critically, to explore myself, and to push my limits.

I always wanted to go back to Danny the Champion of the World; I was too scared to push myself and wanted to hide within my comfort zone. Forget Danny. I am the champion of the world now. English class has taught me to think for myself and to take risks, and I will use these skills for the rest of my life.

## Analysis
At first glance this essay seems a bit like Ben as he presents himself in the beginning of his essay: simple, straightforward, and likeable. Ben makes simple declarative statements; he announces what he is like and takes it for the gospel truth ("I don't like English . . . I solve for x in algebra"); he presents a conversational, confessional tone with plenty of goofy humor ("I don't mean the language . . . I mean the class").

But the point of this essay is that the experience of institutionalized literary analysis as he encountered in high school, while ultimately not Ben's cup of tea, made it apparent to Ben that he was more than a simple, straightforward, "solve for x" kind of guy. Likewise, it becomes apparent that this essay is more than a simple, straightforward essay.

To begin with, Ben presents a really artful contrast between his persona as he presents it at the beginning of the essay versus how he appears at the end. He begins with concrete declarative statements at the beginning; simple, direct, to the point, even getting into a clipped and efficient cadence. His resistance to literary analysis as he is introduced to it with the Phantom Tollbooth is similarly presented in short punctuated sentences—practically mimicking a petulant child and reinforcing the sense that Ben gives at the beginning of the essay that he is linear and set in his ways.

But in the fifth paragraph Ben's cadence changes: he becomes introspective; his sentences become longer, and he even adopts an artistic pattern of repeated sentence beginnings ("I no longer accept political ideas and proposals; I question their purpose. I no longer see a piece of art, admire it, and move on; I probe the thoughts of the artist to determine what he is trying to express."). The stylistic flourishes that Ben puts on this paragraph in the end of his essay completely undermine the sense that Ben is not a "literary" kind of guy, which is precisely what is happening in the narrative in Ben's essay.

But Ben's stylistic touches don't go too far: they are completely congruent with the conversational, personal tone of his essay and we take "Forget Danny. I am the champion of the world now," not as self-aggrandizing or pompous, but as a tongue-in-cheek and nicely-turned phrase. Ben's reminiscences on his childhood, too, and his frank admissions of feeling challenged and disliking what challenges him render him even more likeable, and we can sympathize with the shock of having to analyze books rather than simply read them. The fact that Ben encapsulates what was actually a very long process of coming to terms with literary analysis and realizing its greater application to other areas of his life and scholarship in a single episode organized around having to switch out reading Danny the Champion of the World for analyzing The Phantom Tollbooth helps keep him focused, and the anecdote format lets Ben give nice touches of personal detail, leaving the reader with the sense that he has genuinely gotten to know Ben.
