# Career

## Essay: "Breaking Free of the Chains of a Corner Office"
> **Author:** Cristina H. Mezgravis | **Accepted by:** UC Irvine and UC Riverside
> **Prompt:** Personal quality, talent, accomplishment, contribution or experience

"WHAT IS YOUR GOAL IN LIFE?" he asked. I stared blankly at the computer screen, at the young man who stared back at me, patiently waiting for an answer. I pictured myself walking around a picturesque campus, my arms wrapped around books, busily headed somewhere. "Well, I want to graduate from a good college . . . ," I started to say self-consciously.
"No," my friend interrupted, "What is something huge you would fight to death for?" As I bit my lower lip and looked down at the keyboard, I could feel him starting to smile. I furrowed my brow in confusion, in realization, and just as I started to resent him for mocking my seemingly pointless life, he continued, "Do you want to win a Nobel Prize? Be remembered as one of the greatest poets of all times? What do you want, deep down, your obituary to say?" I was struck by the immensity of what he was suggesting; he wanted me to dream big, to break free of the social conventions by which I bound myself. I remained quiet in thought, as I have a habit of doing, and stared into my past in search of the force that would drive my life.

I used to think this was the same as the question what is your major. I answered that question hesitantly, "Well . . . I . . . like to write, but I want to run my own business, maybe a double-major in business and writing." Then, that day, for the first time, I set these expectations aside, held my breath, gulped, and blurted from my gut, "I want to write a bestseller." I looked up slowly as I felt myself blush, half-expecting him to burst out laughing.

Surprisingly, no muscle in his face even twitched, "Well, that's it then. You're going to write a bestseller," he said as if commenting on the weather, "You'll have countless doors shut in your face, and you'll leave many editor offices in tears, but if you stick it out without letting that put you down, you'll do it." I sighed with relief and smiled thankfully back at him.

Since then, "a major in Creative Writing" has become my answer to the major question, since that is what will lead to my real goal, but the pressure has never waned. Most listeners have nodded in courteous silence, but I have seen the reflection of my miserable future in their eyes. Other less prudent ones have gone as far as blurting out, "You're going to starve to death!" Repeatedly, I came back to him holding a shattered heart and a trampled self-esteem in my hands, but, eventually, I learned to look at those individuals' pity in the eye with my head held high. It makes me proud that I learned to politely ignore concern from he who studied medicine because Dad's a doctor, she who went to law school to please Mom, or he who sits behind a dreaded desk while life flies by–ironic isn't it? Because I am the kind of person that thinks that if I am to live only once, I'll take starving to death with a pen in my hand and a smile of accomplishment on my face over chaining myself to a corner office in order to achieve "success."

## Analysis
Cristina's essay turns the "experience" essay into a "what's your major?" essay. By discussing the experience of how she chose a major, Cristina is able to flawlessly meld the essay prompt into her examination of her own academic (and career) interests.

The dialogue that opens the essay is intriguing and engaging. Pitting her self-conscious aspirations against the incessant questions of an ambitious peer, Cristina illustrates the tension that she had to face when trying to pick a major. On one hand, Cristina considers herself to be leading a "seemingly pointless life." She doesn't feel like she is doing anything special. That admission is a pretty bold move for a college essay, where the point is to talk about your accomplishments and try to stand out from your peers. However, it works because Cristina is trying to prove most popular professions are "seemingly pointless" or dull in comparison to her more unrealistic desire to write professionally. This is illustrated best in the third paragraph. Her line, "Well . . . I . . . like to write, but I want to run my own business, maybe a double-major in business and writing," sounds as insincere to the reader as it does to Cristina. When Cristina realizes that she was considering business because it sounded like a good major, not because it was something she was passionate about, we consider her conviction to become a writer as a mature and well thought out decision instead of a whimsical one.

In the second half of the essay, Cristina expands upon why she is interested in Creative Writing and the realistic concerns that she has about becoming an author. It would have been easy for Cristina to spend the rest of her essay talking about why she likes writing and what she wants to do with her life. Instead, Cristina lays out the various difficulties she is likely to face and comes to terms with them, adding to our sense of her maturity and thoughtfulness. The dialogue about doors being slammed in her face and the likelihood of starving to death help us better understand Cristina's earlier reservations.

And yet, the essay does not become bogged down with the negative tones of hesitancy and reservation. Rather, Cristina moves on to accept the challenges she is likely to face. She reasonably considers the value in pursuing a career that she is passionate about. She is able to recognize that many students her age do not have the direction or courage to go into a field that hasn't already been picked out for them. In contrast, Cristina shows both direction and great courage in her essay, as well as intellectual vitality. Her final line, about her definition of success, proves that Cristina is pursuing writing simply because it is her academic passion. In turn, Cristina proves to us that her life is driven by her need to cultivate her academic passions.

## Essay: "True Happiness"
> **Author:** Armand Nelson Zenarosa Cuevas | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley
> **Prompt:** Describe the world you come from and how your world has shaped you

WHILE GOING THROUGH ELEMENTARY AND MIDDLE school, I was often bombarded with the message, "True success is true happiness." Whether I was watching an after school television special or hearing this lecture from my family, I grew tired of this seemingly cliché message. However, by the time I reached high school, I had greatly matured and was more aware of the world around me. I was surprised at how many people were strongly dissatisfied with their lives, especially when it came to their jobs. From that moment on, I truly appreciated the idea of finding what real happiness is. I realized that expressing my thoughts, feelings, and ideas creatively and openly made me happy. Through this, I could fulfill my dreams of becoming a film director.

After watching television for hours every day at a young age, one could say I was wasting my childhood years. Contrary to the idea that television rots the mind, I am quite grateful for my early exposure to the entertainment medium since it began to strongly pique my interests. As early as seven, I developed original episodes of my favorite television shows in my mind. I would walk around my living room for an hour, creating new episodes of Digimon in my head. At that time, I was extremely embarrassed; to me, it seemed like an odd thing to do. However, this odd thing actually made me happy. In my head, I would create original characters or stories based on existing episodes. I enjoyed making an Excel Document of my own made-up Pokemon, creating my own Pokemon cards, and forming my own music videos inside my head. With my imagination at my disposal, my life was pure bliss.

Entering high school, my fascination with film developed more intensely. By 10th grade, I fully realized my desire to be a film director. I immediately joined the film class at my high school and took advantage of every video project to create movies that my peers would enjoy. I worked meticulously on such projects like my video adaptation of the book, Catcher in the Rye, and a film noir involving conspiracies within a high school. I was involved in every aspect of the video production, from directing actors on delivering their lines to finding the perfect music to play during certain scenes; I took great pleasure and pride in every part of my film-making. It was not just film that interested me though, but anything that involved creativity attracted me too. Whether it was writing an article for the school yearbook or thinking of a rap song involving Lord of the Flies, using my imagination and inventiveness made me feel truly alive.

Strong support from a loving family coupled with a passionate desire to express my imagination helped me realize that I can make a difference in the entertainment industry. With the industry losing money at the box office and suffering from writers' strikes, I want to bring back the golden age of Hollywood with movies that were both popular and critically acclaimed. With my zest for film and artistic vision at hand, making a name for myself in Hollywood is not far from reach.

## Analysis
Armand discusses two sides of the world he comes from. Both sides have inspired Armand, and helped shape his future aspirations. The first facet is discussed in the opening paragraph of the essay. Beginning with a quote, Armand explains how he grew up that only success is equal to happiness. The people in his life explained how success and happiness were linked, constantly telling him what to aspire to. Meanwhile, Armand saw for himself that this statement was not true. Armand shows extensive maturity in his ability to go against the word of his friends and family and develop his own definition of happiness. In one concise sentence, Armand defines happiness as the ability to express "thoughts, feelings, and ideas creatively and openly." In this way, Armand verbalizes not only what he learned from the world around him, but also how that world shaped his view on the rest of his life.

The rest of Armand's life was shaped by the other world he comes from. This was the world of television. Just like the world of Armand's friends and family taught him how to define happiness, television helped Armand to find it. Although most teenagers grow up watching television, Armand describes his childhood in a way that differentiates his experiences. We see Armand truly immerse himself in the experience of watching television. When he is wandering around his room creating new Digimon episodes or making his own Pokemon cards, Armand is taking the passive act of watching television and turning it into an active creative process. In this way, Armand proves that he was resourceful, creative and proactive from a young age.

Furthermore, Armand continues his interest in film during his high school career. This dedication reveals Armand's character. As soon as additional resources became available to him in his high school (mainly, a film class), he used these resources to cultivate his passions and refine his art. Armand gives a series of examples of the projects he worked on, giving the reader a sense of the diversity of his skill set. He becomes involved in creating adaptions, finding music, giving lines and directing. Armand's willingness to be involved in filmmaking in several different capacities illustrates his clear passion for his art. Furthermore, Armand is able to intertwine his artistic passion with his academic knowledge. Both the film adaptation of Catcher in the Rye and the rap song about Lord of the Flies exhibit Armand's ability to interpret literature through art. These projects demonstrate both creativity and artistic maturity.

The final paragraph ties the essay together. Armand turns from discussing the world he comes from and instead recognizing the rest of the world. He acknowledges the issues affecting Hollywood, and provides insights as to what he can do to make a difference. In this manner, Armand suggests how the unique skills and passions he developed during his own life can be used to improve the lives of others.
