# Challenges

## Essay: "The Best Presents Sometimes Have the Worst Wrapping"
> **Author:** Catherine Bronzo | **Accepted by:** UCLA
> **Prompt:** Personal quality, talent, accomplishment, contribution or experience

"MOTADSÉ!" EXCLAIMED MY GRANDMOTHER IN HER native French. Her sudden shriek was due to her biting into a sour cranberry that I told her was a sweet blueberry. Because of my grandparents' on-setting Alzheimer's disease, I always did the best I could to keep our interactions light and fun, despite the looming grief and loss that inevitably lay ahead. Although I could laugh with them in the moment, it was hard for me to see them deteriorate, never knowing when our last moments together would be.

There were so many reasons why I didn't like what was happening: the potential loss of two people very special to me, as well as an unexpected lifestyle that didn't ask my opinion before barging in. My days for the last three years have not consisted of what I imagined this time period of my life would be like: spending weekends with friends, playing sports after school, going to the movies, or in general just being a "normal teenager." Instead, I was fetching meals, repeating conversations, and providing entertainment to the very same people who used to do the same for me. I constantly told friends that I wouldn't be able to spend time with them on the weekends. My Facebook status and text messages reflected the same sentiment. During my freshman year, I even opted for alternative online schooling for the year, just so I could schedule academics around what was the priority of that time, being a caretaker to my grandparents.

Despite my best attempts to always put on a happy face, my emotions about the situation were mixed and raw. Some of the more intense days required me to make 911 calls, or a trip (or two) to the emergency room. Simpler days may have been spent laughing, holding their hands, or wiping their tears as the confusion took a psychological toll on them.

After three years of watching my grandparents slowly deteriorate, they both finally passed on. My grandfather went first at the end of June 2009 and my grandmother followed half a year later in January 2010. I was devastated. Words could not describe the uproar of feelings conjured up inside me. And I felt it, I felt all of it, staying with the emotion until the very end. But what resounded most inside of me in the aftermath of their death was not sadness, but a question: Now what? For over three years I endured the emotional ups and downs of watching two people I deeply cared for walk the slow road to death. Who was I without this identity?

It took some reflection, but I realized that who I wanted to be was the person I already was. I had initially thought that I may have missed the formative experiences of high school that I needed in order to blossom into the woman I intended to become. But when I looked to see what I missed out on, I knew in my heart nothing could compare to the deep connection I shared with my grandparents before they passed on, not to mention all the responsibility, leadership, and emotional maturity I had learned along the way. I was exactly where I needed to be. I discovered that I wanted to do in life what I had done in a small way for my grandparents— dedicating myself to serving others.

With a small shift in perspective, what I initially thought was an emotionally difficult time period, which resulted in me missing out on precious personal life moments, became my grandparents' gift to me. A great gift, difficult to open and wrapped in emotional turmoil, but the best gift nonetheless: a clear passion and purpose for my life.

I will never forget my grandparents, and this essay is written in memory of them.

## Analysis
Catherine begins her essay with a surprising incident. Her first two sentences, which reveal that she fed her French-speaking grandmother a sour cranberry, leave readers wondering why she would do such a thing. After all, isn't a college essay supposed to show the good side of its author, rather than her trickster side? Once she has captured our attention, she quickly reveals why she pulled this prank and subtly conveys her close, playful relationship with her ailing grandparents. The trick itself is a good metaphor for the whole essay. Catherine manages to avoid an overly sweet tone by tempering her story with more complex flavors. Rather than writing about a personal challenge to plead for pity or to paint herself as a martyr, she uses vivid details to demonstrate her emotional maturity and capacity for self-reflection.

In her second paragraph, Catherine demonstrates the power of following a tried-and-true maxim of good writing: "Show, don't tell." Her two sentences contrasting the life of a typical student with the life of a caregiver use specific, poignant examples ("spending weekends with friends, playing sports after school, going to the movies, or in general just being a 'normal teenager'" vs. "fetching meals, repeating conversations, and providing entertainment to the very same people who used to do the same for me"). The parallel structure of the sentences, which each make use of lists, sharpens the contrast. She also subtly hints at her gratitude and sense of perspective in the phrase "providing entertainment to the very same people who used to do the same for me." Far from depicting herself as a martyr, Catherine matter-of-factly lets the reader know that she is aware of what she herself owes her grandparents. She also slips in information explaining why she spent a year of her high school education taking online courses in a way that does not disrupt the flow of the essay. This is a great example of using an essay as a unique opportunity to explain an anomaly in your transcript to admissions officers.

Catherine gives poignant personal details, such as her description of the range of emotions she experienced as a caregiver. Phrases like "holding their hands" and "wiping their tears" conjure specific, relatable images for the reader that bring her experiences to life. When Catherine relates the facts of her grandparents' deaths, she describes this sad chapter in her life with a distinct purpose and not just to inspire sympathy. Her rhetorical questions ("Now what?" and "Who was I without this identity?") put the reader in her shoes as she confronts some difficult questions. Although Catherine's final paragraphs sometimes err on the side of "telling" rather than "showing," she does clearly state how her time as a caretaker helped her articulate her identity and find a direction for her future. Her closing description of her changing thought processes demonstrates her ability to see multiple sides of an issue and her upbeat—but not naive—reaction in the face of difficulties.

## Essay: "My UC Journey"
> **Author:** Yia Vang | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley and UC Davis and attended UC Davis
> **Prompt:** Is there anything you would like us to know about you or your academic record?

COMING FROM A TRADITIONAL HMONG FAMILY, school was a challenge for me even from day one when I stepped off that airplane. The language barrier has always restricted my educational experience and potential: English is not my tongue, and an office not my house. As a bilingual person I realized early on that I must try twice as hard just to be where my peers are at. To understand success and failure I remind myself that we are all humans and can achieve our dreams when there is perseverance to withstand the struggle. Outside of school I have always felt alone on taking care of my schoolwork load because my family is from another country, and I cannot possibly expect them to be experts in education. Taking into account my family's background, I feel limited in expressing my full abilities in school. However, I overcame this disadvantage by pushing myself to take the most challenging classes at each grade level. I have gotten myself many academic opportunities because I saw to it that none should pass me by. During my freshman year in high school I strayed from all my friends by taking Biology Honors instead of a science class with them. The reason for my decision was that the class fitted into the four-year schedule that I had planned for myself as a freshman. In addition, I took Spanish as my foreign language requirement because living in California I could clearly see how the language will benefit me. As a non-Spanish (sic) and a senior I had doubts about continuing and taking AP Spanish; I do not speak the language outside of school. After being in that class for the first quarter I began to truly appreciate the Spanish language in that I now understand most of what seemed impossible to comprehend three years ago. I have pride in myself for knowing three different languages. I am the first generation of my family's war-torn departure from Thailand, and I want to replace the scythe with the pencil now that I am in America. My parents may not be able to change the quality of life that they and I currently have, but I can. I have no excuse good enough to hide my face if I were to end up feeding on the welfare system; entering America at five years old I had just as fair a shot at my life as any child. Due to family background I am not surprised that very few of my relatives make it to college even if not a UC campus. As my way of aiming higher to get the most I can out of my education, I devote myself to become the first one in my family to attend a UC school. Being brought up in a family where I was not exposed to higher education, I want to personally say that I would have had little or no knowledge of the University of California unless I made the effort to go beyond what I was taught. Because my sister made it to a CSU school, CSU became the goal, the standard, that my parents came to understand. To me strength is the ability to accept that everyone faces challenges in life and that success is sweetest after sweat. My family fled to this country so that I can get an education and not live the lifestyle that they lived; I will repay them and build upon my future by getting a valuable education from the University of California.

## Analysis
This essay topic gives students a chance to describe something important about themselves that cannot be found anywhere else in their application. Note that because of the nature of this essay, it is not as formal as other application essays. The focus is more on the content, rather that the writing itself.

For these reasons, it is no surprise that Yia's prose is a little unconventional; he writes all of his thoughts in one large block, instead of making formal paragraphs. With Yia's writing ability, it may have been hard for him to force what he needed to say into the strict format of one of the first two UC essay topics. However, this final topic allows Yia to focus on just telling his story. Even without the help of good formatting, he gives the audience a clear idea of why he decided to apply to the UC system, the challenges he faced by creating this goal and the importance of the decisions he made along the way.

Although the essay is non-traditional, it still tells a story. We start by hearing about Yia's cultural background. This explains why his English is a bit rough. However, Yia overcomes this language barrier in a way that makes up for his imperfect prose. The essay notes that he strove to improve in English and all academic subjects by taking the most difficult classes offered to him. Of course, Yia's transcript and school report would have shown that Yia took the most difficult classes at his school in each grade. However, the context of this choice is what makes it significant. Yia points out that he went against his friends by taking Honors Biology. He did not have examples to follow from his friends or family, but he did what he could in order to plan for his own future. This decision shows immense foresight and maturity.

As Yia seamlessly continues his narrative, he explains his motivations for taking another difficult course, Spanish. He finds value in the ability to speak Spanish and understands its application to his life, not just his goal of getting into a good college. This is especially clear when Yia discusses the reservations he had about AP Spanish. These reservations are honest and thoughtful. Furthermore, they provide a case study of how Yia deals with hardship in school. He is committed to following through and challenging himself intellectually for his own benefit. These are all qualities of a strong and intrinsically motivated student.

As Yia ends his essay, he notes how all of these academic decisions and family obstacles have cumulated to his goal of attending a UC. This goal now comes off as sentimental to the reader. Despite his reservations about his English language abilities, Yia's passion shows through in his rather poetic writing. The line, "I want to replace the scythe with the pencil" successfully captures Yia's enthusiasm for learning despite his family's difficult history. With this final thought, Yia adds a tone of sincerity to his heartfelt yet informative essay.

## Essay: "Who I Am"
> **Author:** Daniel Hien Vuong | **Accepted by:** UC Merced and UC Riverside and attended UC Riverside
> **Prompt:** Personal quality, talent, accomplishment, contribution or experience

SOME DAYS WHEN I'M AT HOME I'm a nobody. When I'm up on stage, I'm a somebody.

An inexplicable feeling consumed me as I finished performing. The sound of the crowd reverberated through my mind. I breathed the heavy air of exhilaration. The energy of the crowd surged through me as I finished a satisfying performance. The last chord has been strummed. The last verse has been sung. The roaring of the crowd continues as I walk backstage.

Being a performer and entertaining the audience is my proudest accomplishment. I recall sitting in the crowd at a concert, wanting so badly to be the man on stage, wielding the guitar, singing his heart out. But I told myself that I would never be up there because my shyness would always keep me from doing so. Here I am a couple of years later and I'm the performer. The journey was long and definitely difficult.

It all started with high school. Entering a new environment was a scary thing for me. I was shy and uncomfortable amongst strangers. It would help if I was well-known for something, but I wasn't. To my friends, I was just a patient friend who they'd come to when they needed advice. To others, I was impossible to single out in a crowd. I wasn't the dancer nor the smart guy. I was just your average kid. And as an average kid, my confidence level was not very high.

Although I envied the musician on stage, I did not have any real intentions to become a performer myself. At the same time, I was interested in learning how to play the guitar because I wanted to be known for something amongst my friends. But as my knowledge and skills progressed, so did my confidence.

The first time I was up on stage I was really nervous. I recall anticipating the end of my performance with anxiety. But somehow when I started to play the guitar, everything just clicked. When I finished performing on stage, I felt like the whole world knew my name. I felt like I existed for once. I received cheers and for a couple of days random people complimented me. After a few more performances my popularity shot up. Soon the whole school started to know who I was. I was the guy who could sing and play guitar. I finally accomplished my goal. Performing on stage was no longer a dream, it was reality.

Now I don't want to sound conceited or anything. Don't get me wrong. Learning the guitar and performing on stage gave me popularity, and whilst I do enjoy it a little here and there, popularity was not the only thing that I had gained. Being pressured onto stage and actually performing gave me confidence. No longer do I have to second guess myself when I am in front of people. No longer do I have to worry about anything. I can be myself and still be the performer. I no longer have any doubts, as because I can express myself through performing, I feel that my talent and accomplishment as a performer makes me feel comfortable around people because in the end, they know who I am.

## Analysis
Getting up on stage with a guitar and singing a song might not sound like an earth-shattering accomplishment to some, but for Daniel, those few moments were a pivotal point in his life, one when he marks the change from being a shy "nobody" to becoming a confident, popular performer. Not everyone is an astrophysics genius who found a cure for cancer and painted a masterpiece all before cooking a five-star, four-course breakfast. And even if you are, none of those things might be the talent or accomplishment that is important to you.

Not only does Daniel show us how important this "small" moment is to him and why, but he also takes us along with him on his journey from frail freshman to big music man on campus and, in the process, paints a much fuller portrait of him as a person than just a performer.

At first glance the essay might appear a bit average, but Daniel does craft a well-structured composition that both directly addresses the prompt as well as demonstrate an above-average diction ("exhilaration," "reverberated") and balanced writing style employing alliteration ("crowd at the concert," "anticipating . . . with anxiety") and a nice flow of short and long sentences.

Like writing a good sentence, Daniel starts the essay with the most important aspect first: he describes in detail how it feels to him during and after a performance. The energy and roar of the crowd. The charge he feels when finished with a song.

After placing us in his shoes, then he states his thesis: "Being a performer and entertaining the audience is my proudest accomplishment." And then he immediately shows us what he was like before he started performing: the passive, shy spectator. Daniel recognizes and identifies his "faults"—being uncomfortable around strangers, feeling "average"—and gives specific examples that flesh out the "before" picture.

At the same time, Daniel reveals some positive aspects of himself as well: he's patient, he's valued by his friends as a confidant and source of advice, he cares what people think about him and he actively takes charge to improve himself. Average and impossible to single out? Start playing guitar. Shy around strangers? Get up on stage!

And while it would be great to know what kind of songs Daniel performed or what he wants to do with his newfound identity as a musician, Daniel keeps the essay focused on him and his journey, and he ends his essay illustrating how the "lessons learned" from his performance experience relate to the development of his character as a whole, a character that, it just so happens, will do very well at a college or university.

## Essay: "In the Midst of Every Difficulty Lies Opportunity"
> **Author:** Carol Nguyen | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley

LIVING WITH MY MOTHER AND FATHER is not easy. My mother is an immigrant from Vietnam who came here for a better future for her posterity. My father never really respected education—he was born into a rich family in Vietnam, and didn't go to school. Unfortunately, when my father came to the U.S., he lost his money. My mother pushes me to excel academically and pursue a more prominent future, while my father discourages me.

Every day, my mother reminds me that I must rise against all odds. My mother taught me at a young age that education was the key to success. She'd tell me to look around and tell her what I saw. I would declare: a cramped apartment, unsafe neighborhood, and an uninformed community. She'd reply that I had the power to change that. When I work on my English homework late at night, my mother stays up with me, commenting that she doesn't know how to write a simple essay. She reminds me that I am empowered with knowledge and can use it to shape a better future for myself. My mother is my driving force pushing me to reach my potential and steering me in the right direction.

My father has suffered severe health issues. After he was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease he stopped working. From the age of six, I saw my father consume handfuls of pills a day, to cope with his illness, and use an inhaler to treat his asthma. When my mom works weekends, I must care for my father's needs. For the majority of the day, I do my schoolwork until my father calls me to help him. My father has as difficult time doing simple things. When I was young, I would check to see if my father was still breathing right before I went to sleep. Growing up with a sick father is not easy and it's taught me about commitment and discipline. Tending to my father transformed me into a mature, responsible adult.

Comparing my parents is like assessing fire and ice; they're both polar opposites that are volatile when together. My father lived his life without planning his future—and he continues to preach it, although he suffers from heightened health issues. My mother takes care of my father dutifully and reminds me that there's more to life than expecting success will land in my lap. Success must be earned through hard work. My mother's immeasurable efforts to get me to see the possibilities of education have convinced me that determination and resolve will grant me the future that my parents never had.

## Analysis
Carol uses a very matter-of-fact tone to discuss serious and difficult issues she has faced throughout her life. She begins the essay with a to-the-point statement that her parents have been hard to live with, but she avoids sounding at all whiny. Readers can empathize with her predicament and admire her determination because she does not beg for their pity. Instead, she focuses on the encouragement her mom has given her and her commitment to rising above her circumstances. She connects the challenges she has faced to her strong commitment to academics. Rather than portraying herself as a victim, she describes how empowered she feels to create positive change by getting an education. For instance, she brings up her role as a caregiver not to lament the carefree high school life she has missed out on, but rather to note that it taught her "about commitment and discipline" and "transformed [her]. . .into a mature, responsible adult."

This essay is a good example for any student who is considering writing about personal challenges or tragedies. There are many compelling reasons for using these types of stories in an essay. Difficult life experiences can be defining, in part because the most difficult parts of one's life often inspire the most significant growth and self-reflection. As such, revealing a personal challenge can help admissions officers get to know you better. Providing this kind of information about yourself can also help explain other parts of your application. For instance, maybe you don't have a ton of extracurricular activities to list because you had to devote time to caring for an ill relative or working an after-school job to help support your family. There is little opportunity to convey that information in a college application except in the open-ended format of an essay.

Do not make the mistake, however, of using a personal story like this simply for shock value or because you think it will help you earn sympathy points. A sad experience in and of itself doesn't make you irresistible to college admissions officers. No matter what you've gone through, an experienced admissions officer has read worse. Contrary to myths that might circulate in your high school, a tale of woe isn't an automatic "in." College admissions officers are looking to build the best freshman class they can, not to let in the students for whom they feel the most sympathy. The magic formula is not to make your readers cry, but to demonstrate your ability to learn from trials and to face them with strength of character.

## Essay: "Struggling in My Skin"
> **Author:** Anonymous | **Accepted by:** a number of UCs including UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UC Irvine, UC Riverside, UC San Diego and UC Santa Barbara
> **Prompt:** Personal quality, talent, accomplishment, contribution or experience

ELEMENTARY AND MIDDLE SCHOOL WERE LITERALLY one of the most painful experiences of my life. It hurt to hold a pencil. It hurt to play with friends at recess. It even hurt to simply sit in class.

I've had a skin condition called eczema ever since I was born. It's chronic, spreads rapidly, flares unexpectedly, and worst of all, there's no cure for it. Eczema caused skin all over my body to turn into raw, burning, and itchy patches. During the day, I constantly fought the urge to scratch myself. At night, I had trouble falling asleep because my skin was on fire. I was convinced that the skin I desperately wanted to step out of would forever inflict torture upon me.

I knew if I really wanted my eczema to go away, I needed to ditch the apathetic attitude I had developed towards my skin. Unnecessary scratching and stress would exacerbate my eczema, but...I guess I couldn't really control these things. And I could always rely on my medicine. However, none of my creams could provide permanent relief.

So, after 15 years of living with my unbearable eczema, I became determined to find a lasting solution. I began to look at my skin in a different way. I was different, and I couldn't live like I had normal skin. Instead, I needed to adopt new habits that suited my eczema.

To address my impulsive scratching, I started filing my nails everyday to keep them short. Before sleeping, I would don a one piece footie pajama, and tie my hands with socks. To relieve my stress, I put my empty planner to use and started to pull less all-nighters. I had always suspected that my eczema was triggered by specific foods, so I started tracking everything I ate. After months of eliminating specific foods from my diet, I discovered that my trigger foods were my favorite foods: dairy and red meat. Instead of reaching for milk in the morning, I went for soy. While my family feasted on cheese pizza, I ate the stale bread from the night before. To my frustration, I didn't see any immediate improvement, but within a few weeks, the burning sensations disappeared. Soon, my weekly flare-ups became rare, and now, I only have the occasional dry crack on my fingers. After months of effort, I had managed to do what none of my medicine had ever done for me.

My eczema has taught me that I need to face my shortcomings and learn how to address them. By accepting my eczema, I found the strength to change a viciously damaging lifetime habit. Now, I can concentrate on my work without squirming from itchiness, and take showers without cringing in pain. For the first time in my life, I feel comfortable in my skin.

## Analysis
One of the best strategies for writing successful application essays is to have the reader walk a mile in your shoes and see the world through your eyes. The writer of "Struggling in My Skin" does just that by slipping you into her skin to feel the experience of both having a very uncomfortable condition and, more important, the self-reflection, acceptance and dedication necessary to overcome it.

The writer's success of sharing her story lies within her use of specific sensory diction and concrete details: her skin didn't just hurt, but turned "into raw, burning, and itchy patches" that were "on fire" while she tried to sleep. Her writing style is engaging and easy to read, from the effective use of repetition in the opening paragraph to the skillful combinations of long and short sentences to create a fluid rhythm.

The writer doesn't use her condition to create a "woe is me" plea but instead spends most of the essay sharing how her attitude changed and then the specific steps she took to improve herself. The concrete examples she uses to support her story—filing the nails, changing clothes and diet, becoming organized to reduce stress—not only help the reader see who she is as a person, but also shows a maturity and determination that translates into success beyond her skin condition to the challenges of college courses and, indeed, to whatever this woman sets her mind. Universities love to see people be able to self-reflect, take responsibility for their situations and then be able to actively engage in working towards a solution.

Remember that the essay is the best opportunity to present yourself as an individual, and so you should take every chance to include as many aspects of yourself as possible. What other activities and interests were involved when the writer "put my empty planner to use"? And what is her focus now that she's able to "concentrate on my work without squirming from itchiness"? Her engaging and inspiring story makes us want to know more about where she's going and how she's going to apply her lessons learned to her future.
