# Community Service

## Essay: "Home"
> **Author:** Anonymous | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley and UC San Diego
> **Prompt:** Personal quality, talent, accomplishment, contribution or experience

IF YOU HAD TOLD ME BEFORE I got into the back of a pickup truck headed for Mexico that by the end of the week I would be hanging 22 ft. in the air, upside down, nailing a roof to a house in a city I had never heard of—I would not have believed you. I grew up in a house that always sat quietly in line with all the other houses in my neighborhood, so the mounds of dirt and dust that lined the streets of Mexico, Mexico I saw, were upsetting. It was a world that I had never visited before, yet once I got there I realized I could never really come back to my house again. A house was something manufactured and common, and suddenly in cement and sand I saw that a home is something more.

My friend had coaxed me off my comfy summer sofa to join his church group in their annual trip to Mexico, but all I knew how to do was dig. And that is what I did—for ten hours. After about seven hours of shoveling, I couldn't stop. No one could stop, and as the sun fell on the first day and car's headlights illuminated a cement slab and a house's frame—I was proud to be shoveling.

In the middle of the second day, we erected the frame of the house and adults began to devour the jobs that needed to be done. My friend and I were out of work. Ignorant to the difficulty of the task, I suggested we roof the house. I was kidding; I had learned to use a nail gun the day before, I hardly felt capable of roofing a house. But the foreman overheard us, and after we were given permission we climbed the ladder to the roof of the first floor. There were three of us up there, and none of us were older than 20.

I have tackled history essays and math tests, but nothing challenged me like that roof in Mexico. I had no textbook for direction, I just learned. Every time my friend corrected a mistake, I got better. Never before had I been so far outside my comfort zone and yet felt so fulfilled. I did not believe I was capable of what I did, and yet I was able to overcome my own limits. Suddenly, I wondered what other worlds lay before me unconquered. If I could roof a house, what else was I capable of?

When the house was finally finished, I took a look around. It no longer looked like a house, or any house I had ever seen before. Beneath the paint, I could see my nails. Poking between sheets of wood, I could see my windows. Hanging from the sky, I could see my roof. The family's tears only transformed the house more; it became a home where a family of strangers had suffered so that a new family would suffer no longer. I never returned to my manufactured world or self-inflicted limits. I returned to a home where people struggled, learned, and grew together in something dynamic and evolving—a home. I returned to a world where I could do anything, but more importantly, to a world where I wanted to do everything in order to create homes where there had been houses.

## Analysis
This essay takes on the well-worn subjects of "home" and "service trips." Most admissions officers have tired of these common essay topics. However, although the subject of this essay is a bit hackneyed, the author walks away from this experience with fairly unique insights. Over the course of his trip, the author learns tangible skills, discovers a passion for learning new things and embodies a willingness to take on challenges. These lessons are what make this essay stand out from others of its kind.

The essay starts out with a captivating image, the young author "hanging 22 ft. in the air, upside down, nailing a roof to a house in a city [he] had never heard of." This description is intriguing, encouraging the reader to find out how the student got into this situation. We then discover that the author had to be "coaxed [ . . . ] off [his] comfy summer sofa to join his [friend's] church group in their annual trip to Mexico." This show of hesitancy doesn't portray the author in the best light. Still, it's honest. Most students don't spontaneously decide to go on a service trip to another country. Giving us his actual motivations—namely, he wanted to be involved in something with his friend over the summer—gives the essay a sense of sincerity.

Having established trust with the reader, the essay goes on to denote important aspects of the author's personal character. The description of the first day of the trip, where the author did nothing but dig, shows that this student is dedicated. Although we know that digging was the only skill the author had going into the trip, when we hear that he was "proud to be shoveling" after 10 hours of work, we know that despite his limited construction skills, he remains humble and driven.

Unsatisfied by the amount he is able to commit to the work of the next day, the author boldly takes on the task of roofing a house with nothing but a nail gun and three other kids under the age of 20. This is bold, and the author's enthusiasm for taking on this daunting task shows great ambition on his part. Despite his lack of knowledge or skill, the author is able to tackle the project, welcoming the challenge with open arms. He works, makes mistakes, gets better and ultimately takes pride in his ability do take on a difficult task in order to learn something new. These skills are ultimately what admissions officers will admire in the author, because these skills will help him continue developing emotionally and intellectually after high school.

The essay then goes back to focus on home and the sense of pride that the author received from making a living space for people less fortunate than him. This conclusion is heartwarming, but falls too much in line with other common service trip essays. The author's lesson about what makes a house a home is not nearly as impactful as what he learned about himself. From this experience the author was able to rid himself of "self-inflicted limits." He learned, he grew and he became excited to try to do more things outside of his comfort zone. It is these lessons that convince us that this student is prepared to take on the many novel challenges of college with fervor.

## Essay: "The Next Generation"
> **Author:** Nhi Yen Nguyen | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UCLA and UC San Diego
> **Prompt:** Personal quality, talent, accomplishment, contribution or experience

OVER 110 HOURS OF WORKING, OVER 20 hours of photocopying, and over 5 paper cuts, I managed to complete my Girl Scout Gold Award Project. Establishing an educational enrichment program at a local library, I taught a class of twenty-two students.

Efficient and dedicated, I recruited participants and volunteers and created an authentic learning environment to bolster the children's academic skills in reading, writing, and mathematics. Aimed at giving young students the knowledge and confidence to succeed, my Super Scholars program sported the motto "striving to learn and learning to strive."

Before I began my project, I completed various prerequisites over the course of the year, gaining not only skills in communication and leadership but also in tennis and decoupage. Then, I was ready to embark on my project planning. After researching all possibilities and referencing previous award winners, I took a step back. I separated myself from the orderly construction of the task. I reflected on that which is at the core of all my endeavors: learning. Having grown from all of my experiences, I knew that I wanted to bring this opportunity to others. Since I have been a tutor and teacher's assistant on numerous occasions, I realized that this project would reflect my goals and strengthen my expertise.

In essence, my objective was to establish an impacting program that would empower the young members of the community through education and diverse experiences. Each day, I'd hop out of the car, run over to the library front desk, and patiently wait for the keys to the classroom. Once in the class, I would direct my super team of volunteers and eager pupils to arrange the desks and chairs. Then, proceeding to the white board, I would point out the list of rules with all the students' signatures and ask a student to recite them. Whenever I asked for the program motto, the students would enthusiastically chant the positive words—almost in unison.

We then proceed with the day, going over the core subjects. To enhance the students' learning, I modified the difficulty level of each assignment to each student's particular ability. With encouragement and patience, I tended to each individual's needs. Including interactive games benefitted the learning process. An exciting competition of knowledge definitely kept them focused on the lesson. Nevertheless, the kids would burst into an uproar after the announcement for snack time. After eating some healthy treats, the students had free time to ask the volunteers for additional homework help, draw on the whiteboard, or play a rousing game of pretend.

Ending the day with art, the students delighted in creating tissue paper projects, origami water bombs, etc. The students also enjoyed the activities on theme days focusing on health and water conservation. Exposed to a variety of experiences, the students remained mentally active.

On the last day of class, one of my students ran up and hugged me, thanking me for holding the program. Being naturally social, I enjoyed the opportunity of working with the students and volunteers. Personally, the project was a significant accomplishment. I was able to develop a beneficial project and follow it through with leadership, coordination, and delegation. As a Girl Scout and aspiring activist, I hope to foster a brighter and more confident generation.

## Analysis
Nhi's essay details the service project she completed to obtain her Girl Scout Gold Award. In and of itself, this award is impressive; it is the highest award any Girl Scout can receive (equivalent to the Eagle Scout rank for Boy Scouts). Although Nhi most likely mentioned receiving her Girl Scout Gold Award on her application, the essay provides space for her to elaborate on the importance of this project.

From the beginning, we get a sense of the time and talent Nhi was able to commit to the project. The laundry list of tasks—"110 hours of working, over 20 hours of photocopying, and over 5 paper cuts"— is a quick, neat way to suggest the scope of tasks she had to take on. In addition to her planning the project, we see Nhi teaching, fundraising and recruiting volunteers. The breadth of these tasks shows the diverse scope of Nhi's leadership abilities. More importantly however, this description of how she single-handedly organized her project attests to Nhi's passion for the work she committed herself to.

The reader gains an even greater understanding of Nhi when she describes her motivations for the project. Nhi found inspiration by incorporating something she had to do into something she wanted to be a part of. For example, Nhi had to acquire a multitude of skills including "tennis and decoupage" in order to start her service project. Then, she analyzed what she learned from these seemingly non-related skills and discovered that her own love of learning made each of these experiences memorable. The ability to come to this conclusion shows great introspection, while her realization that not all kids have the opportunity to learn in an engaging environment like she did shows great humility. Together, these details paint the picture of a student who thinks deeply about both others and herself.

After the first half of the essay develops a profile of Nhi as a person, the second half of the essay comments on the impact of her work. An especially moving image of children excitedly chanting the motto and rules illustrates how excited the children in the program are to learn. We see their dynamic classroom incorporates many learning forms including lectures, practice problems, games and art projects. Additionally, Nhi gives details that suggest the breadth of learning going on in her classroom. Snack time is full of healthy snacks and end of day activities touch upon themes such as water conservation. These specifics attest to the amount of thought Nhi put into her work, making it impactful on several different levels.

## Essay: "How I Found My Voice"
> **Author:** Carol Nguyen | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley

I GREW UP IN A STRICT household that made it difficult for me to find my voice. My parents do not encourage my participation in activities other than academics. I was usually the person in the back who was a keen yet quiet individual, observing from afar, and never had enough courage to speak my mind. During the summer of my junior year I decided to pursue an internship. This decision helped me find my voice.

My father's health condition inspired my decision to find an internship. His Parkinson's disease, asthma, heart issues, and vision problems made me think about my community at large and their access to health information. My curiosity led me to find an internship at the Asian Pacific Health Care Venture in Belmont High School, where I was able to obtain a position as a peer leader. My role was to educate the public about prevailing teenage issues, such as teen pregnancy, nutritional concerns, mental issues, and drug/alcohol abuse. I was trained as an organizer, and felt it was my obligation to inform and aid my surrounding community. The training allowed me to overcome my shyness, and allowed me to find a passion.

I've interned at APHCV for approximately a year and a half. The director of the internship program allowed me to stay longer than the standard three-month program that was offered because they sensed my enthusiasm for the cause. For the past year, it is my responsibility to conduct meetings every week at the clinic and to figure out ways to outreach to our surrounding communities about health-related topics. I am also responsible for training the new peer mentors. During the early meetings I noticed that the new recruits were unusually quiet and shy, though they had brilliant ideas on how to outreach and promote the clinic. I had to coax them into giving their input and feedback to the rest of the group. I saw a part of myself in them because I remember being nervous and self-conscious about my ideas and not wanting to share. By interning at the clinic, I was able to find my voice and develop confidence in my opinions and ideas.

Prior to my internship, I thought I was just one person in the midst of many, and my say-so was irrelevant. Nevertheless, I grew as an individual throughout the duration of my internship, and realized that one voice was all it took. When we organized workshops among my peer group, I made the decision to hold presentations at schools, and as we assessed the workshops, we realized that many of the students we presented to weren't familiar on the subjects we discussed. Each of our efforts made me realize that based on my voice and decision, I informed a large group of students that otherwise wouldn't have known about the repercussions of teen sex, alcohol and drug abuse, and so forth. Instead of succumbing to the timid individual I was so used to being, I used the one tool that I felt was my weapon: my voice; and by interning at the clinic, I was able to utilize it and inform my community on a larger scale.

## Analysis
"How I Found My Voice" depicts a cycle of social change: Carol starts out as a shy student, then finds her voice by helping others, then helps other shy students find their voices so that they too can effectively help. This positive feedback loop is truly an inspiration.

Carol conveys her strong personal connection to the cause to which she has devoted so much time and effort. No one could confuse her with a high school student who logged community service hours just for show. She mentions that she was allowed to intern for much longer than the normal term, an important detail that further underscores her passion and commitment. The way she overcame her shyness is all the more impressive given the lack of support from her parents.

Carol creates an ideal balance between her personal story of finding her voice and her passion and the larger story of the impact she had on the world. After all, community service isn't just about finding fulfillment—obviously, it should also be about providing real, meaningful service to the community. Carol communicates that the kind of service she did was mindfully tailored to create optimal impact: "When we organized workshops among my peer group, I made the decision to hold presentations at schools, and as we assessed the workshops, we realized that many of the students we presented to weren't familiar on the subjects we discussed." Unlike many high school students whose experience of service is naive or simplistic, Carol's experience forced her to engage critically with higher-level issues of how to organize a community and empower young people to reach out to their peers.

Ironically, essays on community service can easily slip into a self-centered mode that is all about the warm fuzzies the applicant got from serving. Yes, college essays should provide some insight into the applicant's character, growth or self-reflection. It's not enough to write a self-congratulatory essay whose only message is, "I did a great thing!" You have to say, "I did a great thing, and I learned something even greater from it." Nevertheless, like Carol's essay, a piece on community service should not focus myopically on what you gained from serving, but should also describe what you contributed by serving. The ideal community service essay covers both internal growth and external impact, something Carol has done with aplomb.

## Essay: "Trellises"
> **Author:** Shelby Newallis | **Accepted by:** UC San Diego and UC Santa Barbara
> **Prompt:** Describe the world you come from and how your world has shaped you

A PERSON LOOKING OUT OF MY bedroom window would see a garden, full of roses, rosemary, and tomato plants. When I look out my bedroom window, I see a garden teeming with life: I see my mother, the ever vivacious rosemary: I see my sister, the tomato plant, beautifully innocent, and I see my father, the rose, genuinely beautiful, but with thorns that can pierce the gentlest of skin. My world is a garden, a garden built on the foundations of hard work, respect, and tradition.

Initially, I was too naïve to see the purpose and value of my garden. As a young girl I did not appreciate nor understand the care needed to make a garden prosperous. Growing up, I assumed that all parents got up early to make their kids breakfast and read them books late at night. I thought every kid was taught to say "hello" to adults when introduced and that every family went to grandma's house for Sunday dinner. Nurtured meticulously, my once barren garden was now blossoming. It was the ideals of hard work, respect, and tradition that served as the invisible trellises, supporting the growth of my character and it was my parents who made it possible for my development.

This next stage of my life is what I consider my "age of enlightenment" because it was the first time that I had a better understanding of me; I now knew why I enjoyed listening to fifties music. I knew why I always wanted to help my grandma cook. And I knew why I continued my community service though my required hours were already completed. It was so clear! I immerse myself in fifties music because I respect the pureness of the melodies, I help my grandma create culinary wonders because I value traditions, and I volunteer because I know it is important to support my community. These are the fundamentals that my parents cultivated in me every day. In the process of my own maturation, I discovered how to assist others in their own personal growth. As a leader at San Pedro High School and with The Assistance League, a national community service organization, I have met people outside my normal environment; and I have made personal connections that have awoken innate qualities. Having organized spirit week at school, which resulted in more participation than ever, I learned that I work well with people. Additionally, I learned that I feed off positive energy when I helped at a local political phone banking station and connected with an eighty-year old woman who only spoke Italian; as I spoke to her in her native tongue, she said I had brightened up her day just knowing that her culture has been shared with today's youth. I am inspired by the people that I have met, and my goal in life is to enhance the lives of others like they have enhanced mine.

I have gotten only a taste of the joys of generosity, a taste that has helped to determine my direction in my life, cultivating a global community by sharing my values. I will know that I have succeeded when I look out my window, wherever I may be, and I see my original rosemary, tomato plants, and roses, prospering; but this time, because of me.

## Analysis
"Trellises" uses the controlling metaphor of a garden as its own supporting structure. After a poetic opening, it sets out a clear structure for the essay and communicates that the themes will be "hard work, respect, and tradition." The rich details in the second paragraph bring Shelby's upbringing and process of self-discovery to life. At the end of the essay, Shelby ties the essay back to its original premise. A well-articulated structure like this is easy to employ in most essays, and it will help keep your work tight and focused. If you find that a statement relating your closing to your opening feels out of place, it might be a sign that the essay has become scattered. Shelby manages to include several different topics—her childhood, her relationship to her family, her community service—all within a unifying framework.

She works in examples of her community service experience without sounding preachy—no small feat. Her secret for accomplishing this effect is including a simple, specific anecdote about an eighty-year-old woman with whom she formed a connection. This small example packs much more punch than more generalized statements like, "I discovered how to assist others in their own personal growth." The sentence about The Assistance League could benefit from more specificity about whom exactly she met "from outside [her] normal environment" and what sorts of "personal connections" she made. In a short essay, however, there is probably not space to include vivid examples from each of the activities she mentions. One strategy to deal with this issue in a college essay is to write a draft with examples for each activity you might want to mention, then go through and delete all but the few activities that have the strongest examples. These quibbles aside, Shelby clearly conveys her genuine interest in helping others—the most important hurdle to clear in an essay about service.

Shelby does a particularly good job of giving credit to her family and others in her life for helping her become a better person. She shows that she has moved beyond the childish mindset in which she took for granted all the love and hard work invested in her upbringing to the understanding that cultivating "gardens" takes unflagging care. Instead of merely listing her own positive qualities, she describes how these qualities have developed and matured thanks to her interactions with other people. That is, Shelby's orientation toward learning from others filters into the way she describes herself in the essay. The way she expresses herself—through an essay that is about her, but also fundamentally about the people who have shaped her—is consistent with her stated interest in "enhancing the lives of others like they have enhanced mine." The uniformity of form and content reinforces the sincerity of her statements about her other-focused mentality.

## Essay: "Whitney"
> **Author:** Sumaya Quillian | **Accepted by:** UCLA and UC Santa Barbara

WHEN I THINK OF THE AFTERNOON I met Whitney, I remember how insecure I felt. I feared she would resent me or dislike school, but above all, I was terrified that I would fail her. Fortunately, I decided I wanted to become a tutor for School on Wheels before fear entered my mind. School on Wheels is a non-profit organization that provides volunteer tutoring to homeless children and children in foster care. At the tutor orientation, I quickly noticed I was the youngest person there. I was an inexperienced fifteen-year old amidst a group of adults, and at that moment anxiety began to plague me.

My dad had to supervise my tutoring sessions because I was a minor, but even with him at my side I still felt vulnerable. As I walked up to Whitney's foster home for the first time, I was oblivious to everything except my own nerves. Then the front door swung open, and a fifteen-year old with a huge smile was there. Her greeting was polite and brief, "Hi, I'm Whitney. It's so nice to meet you." Somehow, those words were the first thing to give me relief.

I have tutored Whitney every week since our first session in June last year. Even though I only spend an hour with her each week, I feel that we have experienced so much together. We have been to college fairs, we have seen museum exhibits, and we have talked about everything from school to family and friends. Some sessions are challenging; we have to review the same subject repeatedly until she fully comprehends it. While those days are productive, I love it when she does not have much homework and we can just talk. I listen to her plans for college, her ever-changing career interests, and lessons she learned in school. From the beginning, Whitney has been willing to learn and to improve, but now I hear how much she wants to learn and how much she wants to achieve.

When I started tutoring Whitney, I assumed it would be a one-sided relationship. I thought that I would be helping her and teaching her. After only a few months of tutoring, Whitney's social worker told me how much Whitney admired me and how much she had learned. I could not help smiling when he told me, because I had no idea how much I would learn from Whitney the first time I walked into her house. She has taught me so much about patience, understanding, gratitude, and hope. Above all, she reminds me how much I love to learn. Looking back, I understand why I was sure that I wanted to tutor Whitney even when I was afraid. I knew that I wanted to help someone learn to love school and knowledge as much as I do. Initially, I could not imagine having an impact as a tutor, because I did not know if I would be good at it. Now I realize that being there for someone who needs help is powerful enough on its own. Every week that I tutor Whitney teaches me that as long as I am willing to learn and help others learn, I will grow and become a better human being.

## Analysis
Sumaya starts her essay with a vivid evocation of her feelings: she builds upon her nervousness in the first paragraph, which the audience is able to share thanks to the feeling of suspense Sumaya creates by giving very limited context at first. In fact, even once we are given the context of tutoring with School on Wheels, Sumaya adds the detail of being a fifteen-year-old among mostly adults, and we become even more nervous—we too share Sumaya's irrational relief when we finally meet the long-anticipated Whitney.

When Sumaya talks about her actual experience of tutoring, she focuses, surprisingly, not on the academic side of things. She talks about going to museums, of just chatting, of preferring the days when Whitney has no homework—the academic part of tutoring is almost an afterthought. It becomes clear through Sumaya's quick description of their tutoring sessions that the relationship is not, as Sumaya expected, particularly academic or one-sided—even before Sumaya says it. It's obvious that Whitney is benefiting from the tutoring when she discusses her "ever-changing career interests, and lessons she learned in school," and when Sumaya makes the wonderfully smart distinction, "From the beginning, Whitney has been willing to learn and to improve, but now I hear how much she wants to learn and to achieve," but it is also clear that Sumaya is engaged in this process of learning. "I thought I would be helping and teaching her," she says, "Initially, I could not imagine having a big impact with School on Wheels, because I was unsure if I would be a good tutor. Now I realize that supporting someone who needs help is powerful enough." Sumaya has very cleverly foregrounded the aspects of tutoring that are not academic, which helps us to see the importance of all the non-academic activities and conversations she has engaged in with Whitney.

Sumaya does an excellent job here of showing rather than telling—and of choosing her examples and her focuses so carefully that the audience comes to the same conclusions Sumaya does just before she says it—that Sumaya seems to be getting as much out of tutoring as Whitney, and that the academic part of tutoring is merely one and hardly the most important, facet of their relationship. She contrasts her nervousness at the beginning with the effusiveness with which she discusses what she and Whitney learned together. The choice of a single, focused anecdote of beginning tutoring with her reflections on her progress along the way and after allow Sumaya to focus very specifically on two lessons she has learned or ways in which she has grown—Sumaya doesn't take on all the aspects of tutoring, and it is in this conscious choice that we can see most clearly what really matters to her.
