# Family

## Essay: "Her Hand"
> **Author:** Kris Thompson | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UC Irvine and UC San Diego

MY BREATHING HAD SLOWED. MY BODY was motionless. The indescribable smell of a doctor's room filled my nostrils. I stared into an almost blinding light above me as the emergency doctor hunched over my face. My sense of touch was numbed in my face and body as the anesthetics coursed through my blood. Yet, for some unexplainable reason, I felt her hand.

In my grandmother's backyard, seven years-old, I was playing by the slightly rusting play-set. I jumped repeatedly over the sprinkler; the warm, rays of summer dripped with the spraying water on to my face.
"Be careful Kris. Don't poke out an eye!" yelled my mom, across the yard.

I brushed off the advice and continued to gambol about my newly discovered fountain of youth. The tree root stood protruding from the wet soil. I never saw it coming. I fell and cut my eyebrow on an exposed nearby screw missing my eye by less than an inch. Globs drip from my brow and splatter on the cement as I walked to my mom.

She had rushed me to the hospital. She had pressed the cloth against my eyebrow as we waited for the doctor. As the doctor stitched me up, the warmth of her loving hand overcame the anesthetics.
Thank you mom, I love you.

I leave you this impression of me: no matter what the situation, the ones I love will always have priority.

## Analysis
Kris starts on a remarkably abstract note—almost cinematic in its presentation, vividness and out-of-sequence timeline—but he manages to drive home exactly and in fact quite forcefully the point that he wants the reader to know about him, to make a statement about Kris' own personal priorities above all else: that Kris, like his mother, will drop everything for and will be fiercely protective of his loved ones.

Not only is this an essay that manages to merge a thoughtful personal reflection, but it is also extremely striking for its vividness and the deftness of its structure. Kris hurls his reader into the scene, into Kris' younger self's own shoes: we are as disoriented as Kris was as we, without knowing the cause or the circumstances, feel his paralysis, hardly able to see for the glaring bright light, passively drinking in the scent of the doctor's office, numb and unfeeling. We can even feel the touch of his mother's hand like an anchor in our sea of disorientation.

Kris puts the reader in his own younger self's shoes so skillfully that he already has our sympathy. Only then does he reveal the premise: we can imagine (with a forewarned shudder) the rusty playset and feel as "the warm, rays of summer dripped with the spraying water." His description of his fall is disgusting, gory, stomach-turning—which is unpleasant to read but delightful in its descriptive richness. Kris deftly ties the end of the story to the beginning of his essay, ending the essay in the same place where it began—with the touch of his mother's hand.

With short, forceful phrases, Kris drives home his point, letting us know with the ferocity and force of his cadence and sentences the ferocity and force with which he will come to the aid of and defend his loved ones.

## Essay: "My Name"
> **Author:** Hayley Ritterhern | **Accepted by:** UCLA and UCSD
> **Prompt:** Describe the world you come from and how your world has shaped you

MY LAST NAME IS ONE OF those names that people dread reading aloud for roll call, announcements, and any other contact they may have with it printed on a page in front of them. I've seen interesting variations, from Ritterhem to Rittahorn. Although it can be annoying to correct people every time, I embrace the unique name I have, because of the story it represents.

Everyone's mother has a maiden name, and my mom's was Ritter_____aa. But oddly enough, my dad has a "maiden name" as well. His was Hernandez. After my parents married, my mom moved here from her native country of the United Kingdom. While she originally adopted my dad's last name, she was the only child of her family, and her own ailing father was sad to see Ritter_____ die. In the spirit of newlyweds striking a compromise, a solution was reached. By combining the first parts of each of their last names, Ritterhern was born.

That blending of a piece of their culture and family heritage has been connected with me my whole life, the first generation recipient of their organic creation. "Ritterhern" summarizes who I am as a person from my Chicano side to my British side, my scientific approach to my love for all things humanities. A descendent of my British immigrant mother, I hold dual citizenship in both the U.S. and the United Kingdom. My father's Hispanic background embraces me with years of deep-rooted family tradition that traces all the way back to my great-grandmother's hacienda in Sonora, Mexico.

Born into a name that itself represents compromise, I embody reasonableness. For example, my friends Katie and Steven stand on opposite sides of the political spectrum, and in our Model United Nations class, I sit between the two, which leads to heated crossfire, as in their debate on the ever-controversial topic of Obama's healthcare plan. Listening intently to the escalating argument, I finally decided that enough was enough. As I cleared my throat, they both stopped mid-sentence. I then spent twenty minutes explaining where their differences arose from, and why each should at least understand and respect the other's opinions. When asked what my own opinion on the topic was, I could argue both sides equally; in the end I'm a strong mediator.

Remaining as devoted to equality and harmony in the world around me as my parents were in maintaining peace in their families, I too become a bridge between differences among friends, the community, and the world in which I live. I am a product of my parents, yet like their last name, I have gone beyond normal expectations to become something new and something great.

This leaves me proud of my name and all that it represents of the merging heritage of my family and of the world which I come from. I know without a doubt that I will not need to correct the reader at the graduation ceremony in four years when he or she announces: Hayley Ritterhern, loud and clear!

## Analysis
Although this essay is about what makes Hayley different, it starts by relating to the reader. "My last name is one of those names that people dread reading aloud for roll call, announcements, and any other contact they may have with it printed on a page in front of them." Many people with unusual last names can empathize with this sentiment. Hayley engages those readers with verbiage that is both descriptive and comical. She then admits that her name isn't just different; it was also made up, derived from the last names of both her parents. This fact adds an interesting twist to the story, urging us to continue on.

Admittedly, Hayley benefits from having an interesting story to tell. The origin of her last name is unique. Still, this story alone would not make a strong college application essay. What makes Hayley's essay stand out is its ability to extract significance from this story and use it to explain why her last name describes who she is.

For example, the second paragraph of Hayley's essay notes that the names were combined because the cultural heritage of each of her parents was important to her family. In order to preserve that cultural heritage to the next generation, both names were used. Hayley then continues to stress how her British and Chicano heritage have affected who she is, apart from her name.

Still, Hayley finds more than just cultural meaning in her name. She recognizes that the creation of her name is also a symbol of compromise. Hayley notes that just like her parents were able to compromise with her name, she has inherited an ability to find compromises to conflicts arising in her life. Hayley's fourth paragraph is devoted to exploring this connection, specifically discussing how she finds a middle ground between conflicting ideas in school.

Although well written, more detail could have made this paragraph even more comprehensive. For example, Hayley points out that the debate between her two friends in her Model United Nations (UN) class was about the Obama healthcare plan. However, when describing the argument between her two friends, Hayley fails to mention what arguments each person made, and how Hayley was able to find connections between the two. It is true, that too much detail here would have led the essay away from the main point of the paragraph, Hayley's ability to compromise. However, giving just one example of each side and explaining how she was able to meld the two viewpoints would have more effectively illustrated how Hayley mediated the conflict.

Hayley finishes her essay nicely by reiterating the significance of her last name. The line "I have gone beyond normal expectations to become something new and something great," is especially powerful. With it, Hayley takes ownership of her identity and stresses how her knack for creative compromise can benefit a college's freshman class.

## Essay: "Stories"
> **Author:** Anonymous | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UCLA, UC San Diego and UC Santa Cruz
> **Prompt:** Describe the world you come from and how your world has shaped you

MY FAMILY IS ONE OF UNKNOWING storytellers. Since my brother and I could talk, my family has gathered around a table every evening, weekday and weekend, to tell stories. We talk about our daily happenings, the gossip we've heard, or the latest political/economic crises to arise. But from my family I've also heard other stories, far more fascinating than the daily goings-on of suburban living; stories that captivated me, enthralled me, consumed me, and changed me; stories that have shaped my life and the dreams of my life to come.

My grandfather, the son of Hungarian Jewish immigrants, would tell us about his childhood in the Bronx, and I'd close my eyes, imagining myself sleeping on a cot in the kitchen of a tenement apartment. I would picture his stories in my mind, trying to envisage the world he had known—his memories had awoken in me a desire to experience a life and a time that was not my own. I wanted desperately to know what life was like in the past—what my own life might have been, if I had been born decades or centuries earlier. My grandfather's recollections cultivated and nourished this fascination with history.

From my father, I gained a world view: the globe expanded in my mind through the many accounts of his travels. Egypt's pyramids, Venice's Grand Canal, Israel's kibbutzes, Mexico's Chichenitza, all materialized in my mind through his words. I would sit for hours at the table, completely spellbound, listening to him describe the different cultures he had visited. From these stories stemmed my voracious traveling appetite—I wanted to see what these cultures were like with my own eyes, experience the food for myself, and learn about the traditions and the history firsthand. My father's travel stories imbued in me a thirst for the understanding of different cultures and places.

My mother's stories offered an entirely different perspective. From her I learned of my Colombian heritage and all the relatives that came with it—my 5 aunts, my twelve cousins, and my very large extended family all played starring roles in her stories. I learned about the Novena, how we pray nine nights before Christmas; I learned how to dance to Colombian music; and I learned how to participate in three different conversations, listen to two others, and eat dinner at the same time. But I also learned how to stay connected to my family, even across continents. Although I don't see my Colombian family often, each time I do it's as if no time has passed. From my mother's stories, I learned that family is a safety net to fall back on, no matter the time, place, distance, or inconvenience.

Stories such as these have shaped my life. Whether they engender in me a love of history, of travel, of family, or some other passion, I always listen with the same thrilling comprehension that I am learning something new, and that this new information will influence the person I will become.

## Analysis
Application essay prompts are intentionally left vague: "What is your "world"? How do you "come from" it? What does "shaped" mean? And shaped from what to what?

One of the most effective writing strategies involves taking the prompt and then defining the keywords specifically for the focus of essay: you. Not the world you think the admissions officer wants to see, but the world you live in and how you believe that world has contributed to you becoming who you are today. "World" can be defined as:

a country, state or neighborhood in which you grew up
an ethnic or religious group to which you belong or belonged to
a favorite movie, piece of literature, a genre that you or another created
a culture of sports, art, music, etc.
a daily routine
a way of seeing / interpreting the world

The writer of "Stories" immediately defines her world as her family and all the stories and connections they share with each other, tells us she's been shaped by those stories and family gatherings and then dedicates three separate paragraphs to illustrate three specific family members, their stories and what the writer has learned from them.

The writer uses her grandfather's stories of growing up in the Bronx to show her interest in history and her ability to visualize and empathize with others across time (generation), and space (small urban tenement as opposed to her own comfortable suburban upbringing). Her father's stories have sparked a wider view of the world and have instilled a curiosity and interest in others. Her mother's stories are the writer's main connection to her Columbian heritage and family and tie back into connections over time and space.

All of the topics and values the writer discusses in her essay—making connections between academic subjects and the people in your community, are great especially for an admissions officer looking to populate a univers-"city". However, there are several ways to make the essay even stronger, starting with the beginning: what better way to start an essay on stories than to tell a (short) story? Each paragraph about a family member should also include as much information about the writer (the real subject of this "story"): what history does she like and why? What does she want to do with it? Where has she traveled?

Humor is an important element of the essay, but make sure that it's intentional: her appetite might have travelled around voraciously, but she probably wanted to convey her voracious appetite for travelling. (Proofread, proofread, put it away for a day, proofread, have a friend or three proofread, proofread it again and then submit it in the application!) Fortunately, the writer shows that she does have a sense of humor when she writes, "and I learned how to participate in three different conversations, listen to two others, and eat dinner at the same time."

And that leaves us with an image of an active, energetic participant in all that's around her.

## Essay: "Learning Family Style"
> **Author:** Anonymous | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley and UC San Diego
> **Prompt:** Describe the world you come from and how your world has shaped you

I ORDERED MY FOOD AND THE waiter walked towards my sister. I reached over for my niece's menu and helped her order food while her mom poured over choices. I turned the kid's menu over to hand it back and saw a drawing. For a five year old, it was complex—butterflies around all of us outside enjoying the purple sky. Surprised at her color choice, I asked her why she would color the blue sky purple. She responded, "Why can't it be purple, it is my sky—isn't it?" My five year old niece taught me that my world is a place where coloring the sky purple is more interesting than coloring the sky blue. I learned something that night at dinner, just as I do every anytime I'm with my family.

Dinner is how I learn. My family crowds around the table and competing conversations grapple for my attention. I usually find an excuse to ask my brother a question, and he digresses into a tangent about Lincoln's fights with Seward or Washington wearing his military uniform to the Continental Congress. My brother has shown me that I enjoy connecting the random facts of history together with causes and effects that give these events meaning and purpose.

Eventually, my sister asks how my Biology class is going. She is a scientist who loves to take what I learned one day and connect it to what I've learned every other day. She taught me that education does not begin or end, everything you learn comes from somewhere and is going somewhere else. You learn about derivatives so you can advance in physics, you learn about Chemistry so you can appreciate Biology. Real learning is connecting the seemingly unconnected; something my sister does with every question she asks me.

Learning isn't about facts I can dish out at rapid fire speed, it is about having something to talk about. I engage my family at the dinner table like I engage my teachers in a classroom and my friends at lunch, with a curiosity and vitality that has cultured a love of learning. I am constantly expanding what I know so I have more people to talk to, and more things to talk about. My world is a place where anyone—five year olds, bio-chemists—can teach me anything. In my house, being eager to learn simply means you are eager to talk. I understand that college means coming out of my bubble and entering new worlds, but I will never leave behind what I have learned from the dinner table.

## Analysis
The writer of "Learning Family Style" cleverly frames and constructs his essay around the topic of his essay: the structure, support and strong relationship of his family. She opens the essay showing the whole family together and then spends time on specific family members, giving specific examples of not only how they relate to the writer but also how each influences the writer's interests, worldview and attitude towards education.

Notice how the writer presents family members in a logical progression: seeing the world through the eyes of a child, listening to the older brother's wellspring of historical facts, making cross-discipline connections with the scientist sister. Not only does the writer show how well educated his family is and how close-knit they are (It doesn't hurt that a key indicator of an applicant's potential success at a university is his or her family's level of education), but the essay structure also shows that the writer understands the progress and development of his own education, as well as shows that he knows how to cleverly structure and write an essay without saying "I can write well."

Part of the success of the essay lies in the writer's use of specific, concrete examples to support his claims: his niece's purple sky, his brother's stories of Lincoln and Washington, his sister's active involvement in connecting Chemistry and Biology. A subtle sense of humor doesn't hurt either, as when he plays off the dining theme when defining learning as not "about facts I can dish out at rapid fire speed." The writer then takes his "Family-style Learning" experience and connects it to both his academic and social worlds in which he actively and enthusiastically engages his teachers and friends.

The essay could have benefited from the writer showing what interests he, himself, pursues on his own initiative and what he contributes to the table. He admits that he needs to come "out of my bubble," but what does that mean? Ending on an enigmatic note might give a reader pause, so at least he returns to his strength: his family and his love of learning.

## Essay: "My Life Saver"
> **Author:** Jaimie Copprell | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UC Irvine, UCLA, UC Riverside, UC San Diego, UC Santa Barbara and UC Santa Cruz
> **Prompt:** Describe the world you come from and how your world has shaped you

I COULD NEVER GET AWAY WITH throwing out a toilet paper roll. It always seemed as if the rolls reappeared out of the trashcan into a box for safekeeping. It is silly to imagine someone saving something like this, but in my family, it is routine. Growing up, my dad instilled in me the notion that everything has a use and "If you haven't used it at least twelve times, it is not trash worthy." For years, I have watched my parents save plastic zip-lock bags, outlet extensions, old t-shirts—nothing ever got thrown out. I will admit that my parents' obsession to save irked me at times. I was particularly embarrassed on the days I arrived at school with my lunch packaged ever-so-conveniently in a plastic bag labeled with either "Food 4 Less" or "Auto Zone." As a result of my parents' stinginess, I never owned a real lunch box.

As a teenager, I resented this thrifty lifestyle. But, I soon realized the wisdom behind my family's conscientious saving. To my parents, any item saved, no matter how random, holds a value incomparable to any other. Every hour of work and ounce of sweat they put forth is to earn a living, not only successfully, but efficiently as well. In my life, I have saved it all, reused it all, and found nothing ordinary about my family. Normally, families shop on a regular basis for necessities and luxuries. But, when you have twelve five-gallon buckets of laundry detergent in the garage, like my family does, that sort of shopping is unnecessary.

Since I was a kid, my friends were always teasing me about how well-off my family appeared and how we "have it easy." But, little did they know, such appearances were born out of frugality and careful saving, and my friends just never truly appreciated the circumstances. Money is simply used differently under our roof. Compared to all the houses on our street, we are the only ones with no lawn to water, no cars from later than the 1980's, no air-conditioning, and, heaven forbid, no cable TV. I have lived this way since I was born. Instead, my family saves on day-to-day expenses and adapts to a simpler lifestyle that involves, among other things, conventional television channels and ceiling fans. From this, I have learned to obtain the most I can out of limited resources and that I do not need to own the biggest, newest, fastest anything to be happy.

Living simply has taught me to adapt to any circumstance and that no obstacle can prevent me from living the life I desire. I want to seize every open-ended chance I get to acknowledge the beauty of the world; I want to breathe it all in and appreciate more of what life has to offer, no matter how minuscule or insignificant it may seem. To me, to succeed is to value every aspect of life and to absorb everything I can from it—and I could not think of any better example for that than my family. My dreams of attending the University of California remain high, but my interests lay in the simple things in life. I never needed a lunch box. But, what I could use right now is a trusty toilet paper roll—which, by the way, makes a most worthy pencil holder.

## Analysis
Jaimie's essay combines a sense of humor and intelligent retrospection in her essay about trying to understand her family's thrifty lifestyle. The opening paragraph is charming. We empathize with Jaimie, watching her innocently throw away a toilet paper roll, just to have it magically reappear. The second sentence beautifully couples Jaimie's sense of frustration with her curiosity as to why things in her home were the way they were. These same sentiments are echoed later in the paragraph when Jaimie gives a laundry list of the types of items she was forced to save, and when she recounts the embarrassment she had to feel when bringing her lunch to school in obviously recycled bags. The key to this intro paragraph is Jaimie's tone and imagery. The audience gets a clear idea of the type of life Jaimie led through illustrative examples. We sense Jaimie's frustration, but her language is not overpowered by emotion. Clearly, Jaimie has matured enough to objectively reflect on these experiences, pointing out both their absurdity as well as their value.

In the second paragraph, Jaimie moves away from the well-defined images of what the "world she comes from" looks like, and instead starts to discern the significance of this world. Jaimie points out that although her family "saved it all," each item used in their house had "a value incomparable to any other" new object. Jaimie could have gone even further, naming what the value added was—be it monetary value or the value of supporting a more environmentally sustainable lifestyle. Still, Jaimie's ability to observe the impact of her parents' decisions shows great astuteness for a high school senior.

The next step in Jaimie's essay is important. Many students focus on the world they come from specifically, but Jaimie takes her essay a step further by showing how the world of her family, compared to the world of those around her. In the second paragraph, Jaimie makes a sweeping statement, noting "normally, families shop on a regular basis for necessities and luxuries." These types of blanket statements should be avoided in college essays, because they make assumptions about other people. However, Jaimie corrects for this in her third paragraph when she compares her families' lifestyle to the other people on her street. By observing that her family doesn't have specific commodities, such as a cable TV set, when every house on her street does, Jaimie makes the point that her family's lifestyle is in contrast with the "normal" life standards in her community. This approach of using specific examples and objective information is more compelling and ultimately more effective than her former blanket statement.

In the end, Jaimie ties together the essay by bringing back the powerful images of the lunch box and the toilet paper roll from her first paragraph. The difference is that now Jaimie understands the use for these objects, and embraces their utility. In this way, Jaimie proves that she was indeed shaped by the world she comes from, and she retains the wisdom of the lessons she learned.

## Essay: "Hot Showers and River Baths"
> **Author:** Brian Tashjian | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley, UCLA and UC San Diego
> **Prompt:** Describe the world you come from and how your world has shaped you

I HAVE ALWAYS CONSIDERED MY WORLD to be a sheltered one. I grew up in an extremely stable family with two parents and two sisters that have always loved me unconditionally. I have been privileged with a comfortable home and financial situation, and never once has a meal or a house to sleep in been in question. The uncertainty was never whether a meal would be served, it was only which meal would be served. Yet despite spending my entire life with the family I have in the United States, I come from two homes. I was lucky enough to travel with the AMIGOS de las Américas Immersion Program, spending a month and a half in Nicaragua, working with the community on health related projects and lessons in school. It was here I found my second home, the small town of Bajo de los Ramírez, and it has become as much a part of me as that sheltered life that I have been living. Six weeks, as opposed to seventeen years, never seemed like enough time to become part of an entirely new family, but the amount of emotion I felt, (the love, the sadness, the excitement, the fear), proved that wrong. I did not realize how attached I had become until my Nicaraguan father wrote me a letter that he gave to me on my last day in Bajo. As he handed me the note, he looked me in the eye, and with both of us holding back tears, he told me, "Estarás mi hijo, para siempre:" "You will always be my son."

I come from two worlds. I come from hot showers and river baths, queen beds and cots, carpets and dirt floors, clean sheets and mosquito nets, learning and teaching, English and Spanish. I come from loving mothers, hard-working fathers, goofy siblings, dinner with friends and family, conversations about anything and everything, card games where it doesn't matter who wins, impossible goodbyes, and increasing desires to return. These families have shaped me into who I am today and the experiences I have had with both families affect how I plan to live my life. The love my United States parents have shown me for seventeen and a half years has helped me discover how important it is to me to be a father when I am an adult. The hospitality I received from my family in Nicaragua has encouraged me to travel in college and beyond graduation. Finally, the time my United States mother has spent talking to me about being a doctor and the application of those discussions in Bajo while taking care of an injured community member have helped me realize my desire to take care of others for the rest of my life, specifically in the field of medicine. Two families can be too much for some people, but because I have such strong relationships with both, I am very comfortable loving Mom, Dad, Mamá, and Papá.

## Analysis
Brian's essay is interesting because he talks about how six weeks he spent abroad make up half of the "world he comes from." Although Brian doesn't actually come from Central America, by defining his experiences in Bajo de los Ramírez as the "world he comes from," Brian suggests that his short time there has helped define who he is. It is a clever way of illustrating the impact of his time abroad.

The bulk of the essay focuses on the attachment that grew between Brian and his host family. This is most potently done in the anecdote about how Brian's host father said goodbye. His sentence—"as he handed me the note, he looked me in the eye, and with both of us holding back tears, he told me, 'Estarás mi hijo, para siempre:' 'You will always be my son.'" —beautifully illustrates how close Brian and his host family became. This is a perfect example of the "show, don't tell strategy." Instead of Brian claiming that he became close to his host father, he tells a story, using the host father's own words to describe the nature of their relationship.

Although the relationship between Brian and his host family is heartwarming, it doesn't tell us much about who Brian is as a person or as a student. Furthermore, Brian instead of spending time developing what his time in Nicaragua was like, Brian slowly gives us glimpses of what he remembered. His series of comparisons, "I come from two worlds. I come from hot showers and river baths, queen beds and cots, carpets and dirt floors, clean sheets and mosquito nets, learning and teaching, English and Spanish," is powerful and poetic. Brian shows how the luxuries he's known at home lie in harsh comparison to the way of life in Bajo de los Ramírez. Furthermore, Brian discusses these differences with a fondness that alludes to his cultural sensitivity. Instead of discussing how difficult it was to not have hot showers while working abroad, Brian suggests that he embraced the chance to take "river baths" and broaden his experiences.

Brian could have spent more time focusing on what he specifically took away from his abroad experience. Instead he simply states that he learned to see life from multiple perspectives. Brian suggests that moving forward, he will consider the perspectives of both his biological family and his host family when making decisions and continuing his education. He exemplifies this point best when he starts discussing how both parties affected his ambition to become a doctor. He notes that his biological family encouraged him to pursue medicine and gain a higher education, while his time with his host family encouraged him to travel and help others. These details finally give the reader a strong sense of who Brian is within the context of the world(s) he comes from.
