# Heritage and Identity

## Essay: "My Tri-Lingual Origins"
> **Author:** Edward Shafron | **Accepted by:** UCLA

I UNDERSTAND THREE LANGUAGES.

The first of these is obvious: English. Or, more specifically, American English. This language comes from the world that most frequently influences me—that of a high school student in Southern California. This is a world of suburbia that my parents chose for me; of occasional adventures, true—but mostly of routine and comfort. I don't scorn this existence; I thoroughly enjoy living it. In this world I have the time and resources to do what I like—bike, run, and swim to my heart's content, pursue my education, and travel around with my friends. Here I find most of my dreams and aspirations: after proving myself, I strive for the same emotional and personal stability that I have enjoyed in Southern Orange County. The values and mindset I formed here are only a part of the world which informs me, however.

My second language is German. This is something I have learned through three years of study at my high school. This brief cultural exposure—and some travel I have done in Europe and the Pacific—has served to add a certain international awareness to my dreams. I have begun to appreciate the vibrant world outside of my current sheltered existence, and this is something that I want to experience further.

My text-book German is different to the German that my grandfather learned during the Second World War. He learned grudgingly and out of necessity as a Ukrainian prisoner to the German Army, in a deadly world where uncertainty and struggle were as regular as the sun rising.

After the war, through wit and will, he made his way to Australia, where my father was born. And through my father, I was taught courage, intelligence, and humility. In this way the world of my grandfather has influenced my dreams and aspirations –his world is also mine. I aspire not only to the materially attainable, but also to personal integrity and character.

Now my grandfather had to learn a new language, that of Australian English, to get by in his new world.

Thus my third language and the third facet of my world—Australia—the country of my birth.

Australia is a less tame world than Southern California. The Australian stereotype—of a loud, adventurous, bronzed people—is well deserved. This is a country obsessed with sport, where the family and the physical are two of life's sacraments. I discovered the reward and enjoyment of a "bush walk", a rugby game, and sense of caring family felt around the "barbie". My dreams always include this aspect of my world—a life where I have a warm, happy family and healthy lifestyle.

My three worlds are inextricably intertwined and spill over into each other. They will continue to shape my dreams and aspirations as they evolve over time. But my "tri-lingual" origins will stay with me, and I hope that I can do justice in my life to the ideals represented by each.

## Analysis
This essay combines some extremely deep introspective insight with a well-crafted, almost poetic structure. Edward organizes his essay around the linguistic influences in his life and ties those linguistic influences, and the history from which they come, to the elements that define him and his experience.

This is an incredibly skillful, artistic way to integrate Edward's family history with his diverse life experience, his language skill and his hopes for the future, all while showcasing a very smart sense of literary organization and a command of a high-level vocabulary.

Edward begins with a hook—an impressive assertion about his abilities, although in itself not particularly unique. But when he begins with "American English" as his first language, we can see that this essay is certainly not going to be about Edward's achievement in high school language class. We can see that he is appreciative of the relative affluence in his life, but introspective about it, and that he keeps it in perspective compared to his family's origins. This section allows Edward a little bit to showcase his other extracurricular activities and his well-roundedness.

But where the essay really takes off is when he leaves off of highschool German class and points out, "My text-book German is different to the German that my grandfather learned during the Second World War." This juxtaposition, and Edward's clever embedment of his third language into the story of his grandfather, launches the essay into a completely different territory: Edward's intriguing family history and his strong connection and identification with it and his father and grandfather shows the stark contrast between Edward's own suburban life in Southern California and his family's past struggles through wars and emigration. But Edward, by delineating and showing us the values he has received from his father and grandfather, reinforces the sense of what he says, that his grandfather's "world is also mine." We see Edward in a completely different light, and the very care with which he tells his family's story reinforces the sincerity with which he asserts his values, his care for his family and his constant introspection and assessment of his surroundings and background.

Edward writes with skill, and more importantly, he writes with care and sincerity. Certainly, he has life experience and privilege of his own, but the vividness, specificity and generosity with which he forefronts his father's and grandfather's struggles is remarkable and likeable, and the skill with which Edward ties his values, ideals and goals to a specific set of experiences and family memories associated with the linguistic influences in his own life is admirable.

## Essay: "Transitioning across Diversity Lines Effectively"
> **Author:** Linda Thai | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley
> **Prompt:** Personal quality, talent, accomplishment, contribution or experience

THROUGHOUT MY LIFE I'VE BEEN EXPOSED to a variety of languages, specifically Cantonese, Mandarin, Teochew, Khmer, Vietnamese, Spanish, and English. Due to my family's past experiences with the events of the Khmer Rouge, they frequently relocated to different areas near Cambodia and acquired new languages and dialects from other Asian countries. As a child, I constantly dealt with transitioning between Teochew when speaking to my parents and English with my brothers, while also learning Khmer through observation. Due to my exposure to several languages at the time, I became overwhelmed and shied away from crowds, not wanting to speak up fearing that I would speak improperly and be shunned upon. However, transitioning between these languages would eventually strengthen my multilingual communication abilities and comprehension skills with a diverse range of people. With the privilege of being familiar with four languages today, as a young child, I wouldn't have guessed that language would have such a significant impact on my life.

During family gatherings when I was young, my relatives conversed in a mixture of Chinese, Khmer, and English; it would catch my attention, and I would turn and listen attentively to try to figure out what was being said. Having such curiosity as a child, I didn't back away, I remained close by because I wanted to learn the languages too. As I became older, I occasionally went to Chinatown with my mother, which provided another opportunity to listen to conversations and observe social interactions. Repeating my actions as a child during family gatherings, I would listen, but this time I thought of the cultures and traditions these strangers shared with each other and the similarities I shared with them; that we are victims of social injustices, political underrepresentation, economic inequalities, and personal challenges. These strangers, bound by similar social injustices in our society, caused me to think in depth; as humans, many tend to focus more on the differences of people rather than their similarities resulting in a lack of appreciation for each other. Understanding this offered me a sense of comfort and gratitude for the different cultures and ethnicities in the world because, whether it's tradition, culture, music, or food, these factors bring our society together while maintaining global diversity. Through this ongoing experience, I've learned to appreciate the differences in every person because the distinctiveness of each individual also works to establish bonds between them. This quality gives me a sense of pride because I've learned that with differences come commonalities.

Thinking about my interest for languages makes me realize that as individuals born into a world of diversity, we are exposed to such a limited amount of it. My experiences with different languages make me proud because I'm able to keep an open mind and to understand and relate to more people, which inspire me to develop my sociability skills. I was known to be reserved when I was younger, but I've become more gregarious as I familiarize with different languages, cultures, and people and the social injustices we experience.

## Analysis
Linda's story about how she learned seven languages tells us a lot about who she is both as a student and as a person. Of course, Linda's language background speaks to her immense cultural knowledge. Throughout the essay, Linda mentions that by learning how to speak with people from different countries, she was able to in turn learn more about the world. This, along with the fact that Linda moved so often as a child, suggests that Linda is both cultivated and adaptable. Linda's knowledge of global customs and issues comes up over and over again throughout the essay. When Linda discusses how she was able to relate to strangers about "social injustices, political underrepresentation, economic inequalities, and personal challenges," the reader gets a sense of Linda's sensitivity to those around her. This awareness of other people, their lives and their cultures allows Linda to grow from both her own experiences and the experiences of the diverse set of people who surround her.

These details give a lot of information about how Linda developed into the person she is today, but her process of learning Cantonese, Mandarin, Teochew, Khmer, Vietnamese, Spanish and English talks to who Linda is as a student. Throughout the essay, Linda discusses the various learning styles she employed to pick up several different tongues. Some languages she learned through traditional means, mainly speaking to her friends and family members. Other languages she had to learn by observing other people or just listening, both of which are significantly more difficult. By mentioning these various means of educating herself, the reader gets a sense of how resourceful Linda is. The fact that she made the effort to learn additional languages, through her own effort, demonstrates Linda's sincerity and willingness to learn.

This enthusiasm for learning also shows through when Linda discusses her personal nature. At first, it seems that Linda is intimidated by the diversity around her. She notes that she "became overwhelmed and shied away from crowds, not wanting to speak up fearing that [she] would speak improperly and be shunned upon." One would think that this would prevent Linda from picking up new languages in turn. However, Linda does the opposite. Instead she leans close to hear the conversation happening at her family dinner table and embraces the chance to go to the market where she can pick up new words or phrases. These scenes in the essay again speak to Linda's enthusiasm for learning. In turn, Linda's keen interest in understanding the world around her turns her into a more outgoing person.

Linda's final paragraph wraps up the essay perfectly as she realizes that learning to speak seven languages is more than just a skill. It is a process that has brought her world knowledge and the social confidence that define the person she is today. Linda's ability to outline how this process created this effect is what makes her essay ultimately so effective.

## Essay: "The Freedom in My Origins"
> **Author:** Cristina H. Mezgravis | **Accepted by:** UC Irvine and UC Riverside
> **Prompt:** Describe the world you come from and how your world has shaped you

JUICY TURKEY, GREEK SALAD, WARM "HALLACAS" (a traditional Venezuelan dish), Latvian ginger cookies . . . . Sounds mouthwatering, no? These are some of the dishes that sit on the table at my traditional Christmas dinner, reflecting the hybrid of customs that exists in my family. My maternal grandparents are Greek and Latvian, and my paternal grandparents are Venezuelan. Diverse backgrounds are the yin and yang of my character, but, together, they shaped my aspirations in a unique way. Thanks to them, my vision of happiness involves two key elements: being surrounded by the laughter of my relatives and having nothing to hide.

Both sides of my family have played an instrumental role in the formation of my character, but, most importantly, they taught me the value of family. When getting to know me, you find yourself facing a layer of courtesy and prudence chiseled by my father's side: you have to dig anything personal out of me with a spoon, but this means I am just getting to know you better. I have never seen a problem so incendiary as to make my father raise his voice, and, similarly, I seldom get mad, but I don't recommend trying to wake me up on a weekend. In contrast, I have seen my maternal relatives cry listening to an old song. I guess that's why it's normal to catch a glimpse of a tear rolling down my cheek during a movie. As in a typical Greek family, everybody is in everybody's business and though this can be frustrating at times, from them I've learned to understand that "my problems are their problems," and I've tasted how comforting it feels to have people who will help you up when you fall or simply give you a comforting hug—a feeling that once tasted is indispensable for the rest of your life.

I learned the importance of honesty from my grandfather: I remember cocking my head to one side and gazing at him while he told me, "There is nothing more rewarding than going to bed with a clear conscience." While this view of openness and forthrightness has always been the European core of my family's teachings, a noticeable characteristic of Venezuelans is their caution: you can find yourself talking to one for hours, but if you analyze the conversation, you'll notice that it didn't get past politics or gossip.

Although the European side advised me to be honest, my father, as a Venezuelan, juxtaposed this idea, "You count true friends on one hand, and you'll have leftover fingers." I was once naïve enough to trust everyone who surrounded me, until I found myself facing their backs. I'm not proud to admit that each time I hit this wall, I grew increasingly bitter at people around me, until the day when Jaime Jaramillo, a globally recognized social leader, defender of children's rights, and probably the most inspiring individual I have ever met, gave a speech at my school. I found that a few of the characteristics I despised, I displayed myself. I had a total change of perspective; instead of being disappointed every time I was slapped by reality, I could choose to look at the positive in an individual and treasure the few individuals who had my back.

I felt relieved to finally find how the European and Venezuelan sides of me could merge into one. Because of the support and love of my family and my dedication to honesty, I learned to believe in myself and finally set aside society's expectations of finding a supposedly lucrative career, and opted instead for honesty with myself by pursuing a Major in what I love: Creative Writing. Figuring out where I was from, literally and metaphorically, has freed me to find out who I will be.

## Analysis
The essay starts by detailing the food present during Cristina's "traditional Christmas dinner." This first sentence of the essay is enticing; the mouthwatering descriptions capture the attention of the reader while illustrating the various cultural influences that make up Cristina's family traditions. She then goes on to answer the prompt quite literally, by describing how her Latvian, Venezuelan and Greek family members have helped define who she is as an individual.

Cristina organizes her essay by going through each of her notable character traits and pointing out where those traits came from. This structure suits the theme of the essay well. As Cristina is talking about the "world she comes from," (i.e. each of her relatives) she is also talking about herself. In this way, Cristina's essay answers the prompt, and yet never ventures too far off from the purpose of the prompt, getting to know more about Cristina. Furthermore, Cristina's descriptions of both her family and herself are well developed. Instead of simply listing each characteristic and who she learned it from, Cristina helps the reader understand what each character trait means to her. For example, instead of simply saying that her Venezuelan relatives are cautious, Cristina explicitly describes what the word "caution" means in the context of a conversation. In Cristina's eyes, having "caution" means never venturing beyond a shallow discussion of "gossip or politics" when chatting with peers. In this way, we learn that Cristina's definition of caution also involves some kind of social awareness. These definitions are unique, and they further aid our understanding of Cristina as a person.

Unfortunately, the structural organization of Cristina's essay begins to break down in Cristina's fourth paragraph. She loses focus on her family and its influences. Instead, she vaguely describes how she used to trust people too much and "found [herself] facing their backs." Without further discussion of what "facing their backs" means, Cristina then thanks "a globally recognized social leader" for helping her understand how to value more supportive individuals. Although admirable, this paragraph doesn't quite fall in line with the rest of the essay, which focuses on how her family helped form her into the person she is today. This paragraph would have complimented the essay more if Cristina had given more details about what happened and explained how her family's definitions of trust and friendship helped her re-consider how to choose friends.

However, the final paragraph of the essay brings the essay back on topic. She notes that by understanding her family, she learned to understand herself. In turn, she was able to come to terms with why she wanted to pursue her potential major. In this way, Cristina nicely ends the essay. We walk away with a strong sense of who Cristina is because of her family, but we also gain an understanding of who she intends to be apart from them.

## Essay: "Passion and Potential"
> **Author:** Nhi Yen Nguyen | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UCLA and UC San Diego
> **Prompt:** Describe the world you come from and how your world has shaped you

AS I LOOK ACROSS THE BURNING pavement, I see a flurry of colors in motion. Ascending, descending, and transcending the depths of my pride, I applaud the young girls behind the umbrellas.

Having grown up in my Vietnamese community, I am delighted to be involved with all the facets of my culture. In the school where I learned my native language, studied my country's history, practiced my religion, and found support in the encouraging arms of family and friends, I established my roots in Vietnamese dance.

Participating in the annual holiday shows is always a momentous occasion. After each performance, my girls scurry over, seeking my approval. When they recognize my beam of motherly pride, they smile with a sense of accomplishment that can only be exceeded by my own. As a choreographer and dancer, I know that preparation and practice are essential. With every song selection, costume change, and prop placement, my perfectionist nature sets in, only to be whisked away by my passion for the process.

The rhythmic flow of the dance form coincides with my gentle nature, yet its sharp precision balances with my free spirit. Creating the routine and guiding its artistic direction allows me to utilize the full potential of my creativity. However, nothing can compare with my joy in teaching my girls. By focusing on their unique talents, I ensure that the cohesive effort is a perfect blend of synchronization, vivacity, and enjoyment. Over the seven years of dancing, I have learned so much from my peers and mentors, and by incorporating their experiences with my personal taste, I have developed and grown as a performer, gaining confidence and social understanding.

Naturally, I am extremely ambitious: I do not fear the impossible. My culture is such a big part of who I am, so I want to reach out to my native country. In the future, I hope to travel back to Vietnam and do all I can to help the country rise out of poverty. A place where children yearn for a pencil, the poor resort to stealing toilet paper, and the hungry commit suicide to end the pain should not exist. To amend the atrocious situation, a cooperative and compassionate community must be established.

Although I have yet to bring my full plan to fruition, I have made progress through community service. Nevertheless, my ultimate goal is to give all people the necessary tools to develop self-sufficiency. Whether on stage or off stage, I aspire to enrich the lives of others and myself. With the resources of a higher institution to strengthen my knowledge and character, I will be able expand my impact in the global community.

## Analysis
Nhi immediately lights a fire of interest with her first sentence. Why is the pavement burning? What's the flurry of colors in motion? Fire? Explosions? Riot? She then uses the nifty linguistic trick of tripartite feminine rhyming ("Ascending, descending, and transcending") to shift from the physical ("flurry of colors in motion") to the emotional and personal ("the depths of my pride"). The applause at the "young girls behind the umbrellas" both calms our worry of danger yet still remains mysterious enough to make us want to continue reading. That's quite a bit packed into the first two sentences!

After piquing our curiosity, Nhi then defines not only her world ("my Vietnamese community") but also which aspect is most important to her: "I established my roots in Vietnamese dance." Remember that the essay prompts are intentionally vague and open to interpretation, and a successful writer will quickly define the terms of the prompt in relation to him or her while also focusing on a specific aspect of the "world" in which to ground the essay.

Nhi is a successful writer not only because she spotlights the most important aspect of her world to her, but she also shows us her world by employing many concrete and sensory details that place us in her shoes: girls scurry over and bask in the "beam of motherly pride," while in the impoverished parts of Vietnam "children yearn for a pencil, the poor resort to stealing toilet paper." She also demonstrates her quality writing ability by employing mature, appropriate diction ("I ensure that the cohesive effort is a perfect blend of synchronization, vivacity, and enjoyment.") and use of alliteration ("With every song selection, costume change, and prop placement, my perfectionist nature sets in, only to be whisked away by my passion for the process.")

All the while, Nhi layers a complex portrait of herself. Not only is she a dancer, but a choreographer as well, with the ability to organize and direct a performance. She works well with kids, and indeed she recognizes that teaching and helping others is more rewarding than the individual joy she feels when dancing herself. This flows directly into and explains her commitment to public and community service, and she connects the dance-hall stage in her local community to the world stage of International Aid. And we can easily see her firm belief in teaching self-sufficiency within herself.

While her concluding paragraph is a bit vague (what, exactly, is the "full plan"? We're excited and want to know how she'll put her passion into play!), we definitely come away with the feeling and understanding that this is a person who will make a change, and she'll do it with art, elegance and love.
