# Leadership

## Essay: "Leave Your Heart on the Dance Floor"
> **Author:** Kaitlyn Makanaakua Basnett | **Accepted by:** UC Irvine, UCLA and UC San Diego
> **Prompt:** Personal quality, talent, accomplishment, contribution or experience

I DO NOT WANT TO DANCE today. This thought runs through my mind as I shuffle to my car, swing the door open, and slump myself down into the seat. It has been another long Monday. I fumble to stick the key into the ignition, start the car, and get out of my neighborhood. I could be sleeping right now; maybe I should just turn around and go home. I get onto the freeway and my limbs continue to force me to drive on, drawing me nearer to my destination while I stress over the AP Statistics homework I have yet to start. My radio drones on as I pull into the parking lot where I park and shut off the engine. I step out of my car and hobble over to the trunk where I grab my skirt and water bottle before slamming it closed. I walk grudgingly towards the front door of the studio. Let's get this over with. My night as a Polynesian dancer begins.

I step into the studio, smiling meekly at the parents as the door jingles shut. I throw my skirt on and tie it quickly as I enter the room where all the girls are waiting eagerly for class to begin in five minutes. They are standing in the center of the dance floor and making sure that their skirts are on just right, using the mirror in front of them to carefully adjust the bottom so that it is the same length all the way around. "Hi Katy!" "Katy's here!" "Hey Katy!" are some of the exclamations that fill the room the second they see me. Their excitement dissipates the cloud from above my head. I guess I do want to dance today.

I spend the next hour with these girls, helping them to learn their techniques correctly as well as understand how to dance with the music. With them, patience comes naturally. I wait eagerly for the grace to click in their young brains, for the music to fill their hearts in a manner that will hopefully make every step like a mere breath someday. I watch as they take in each new movement and try their very best to do it exactly as I am demonstrating it. The glow that surrounds them when they manage to learn a step correctly fills me up with pride. No amount of sleep could ever match this feeling of accomplishment.

I then spend the second hour with girls of a slightly higher dancing ability, helping them to perfect their techniques rather than just learn them. The key is to understand how to express the love of dancing, along with dancing to the music. The glow is much harder to produce within these girls. They know how to dance for the most part, and they dance mainly because their parents want them to. They could be sleeping right now too. I try and treat each of them with the utmost respect, avoiding a condescending tone with them at all times. However, I still find it difficult to produce passion within them.

The studio owner's daughter Malia speaks to the girls at the end of every class. On this Monday she focused on the statement, "Leave your heart on the dance floor." It is truly as simple as that—something I realized. I have become a leader through my passion for this culture. During these two hours of my evening, I help the girls who were once in my place as eager students, teaching them how to dance and how to express their own passions. I instinctively try my hardest to assist them in discovering how to take their heart out of their chest and lay it in front of them on the dance floor. What I feel when I dance is something I try and pass on to my students.

After a long day, Polynesian dancing dissipates the cloud that hangs over me. When I dance, I leave my heart in the process. I forget about AP Statistics and I forget about sleeping. I forget about how long of a Monday I just had. I tell the stories of the Polynesian culture and the values of unity and family through my actions. I walk away from the dance floor feeling free and prepared to take on another long day. I realized on that Monday that whatever activity invokes a passion within us should be highly valued and shared with our peers. I am confident in my abilities as a student and I realized on that Monday that my dream of becoming a Pediatrician is one that will never fade; it never has faded. However, I also want to be a Polynesian dancer and I want to do it forever.

## Analysis
Kaitlyn's essay begins on a tough note. Although beautifully written in a strong narrative style, the tone of the essay closely runs the line between eloquent honesty and complaining. The image of Kaitlyn brooding in her car after a long, hard day, although negative, is something most people can relate to. Furthermore, the fact that she still decides to go to dance class shows Kaitlyn's commitment to her art. Similarly, the scene describing Kaitlyn meekly entering the studio provides a contrast to the image of kids excitedly flocking around her, while she leads them through dance class with a reinvigorated love of dance. Together, these scenes illustrate how dance brings balance to Kaitlyn's life.

The third paragraph picks up speed with a moving description of Kaitlyn's young dance class. Kaitlyn shows both leadership and caring by patiently showing her students through steps. She becomes inspired by their passion to learn; her words—"to fill their hearts in a manner that will hopefully make every step like a mere breath someday" —sound like poetry. As the audience becomes convinced that Polynesian dance is important for Kaitlyn, she acknowledges that teaching kids how to dance is worth more to her than sleep. This establishes a well-developed positive contrast to the tone of her opening paragraph.

Yet, Kaitlyn's description of her second class is not as upbeat. The reader gets to see that Kaitlyn is able to work with students of a higher skill level, but the enthusiasm of the previous paragraph isn't there. Her students are forced by their parents to dance and Kaitlyn expresses frustration in her inability to inspire them. Furthermore, Kaitlyn's mention that "they could be sleeping right now too" mimics her own negative feelings about dance from the beginning of the essay. In turn, faith in Kaitlyn's love of dance is lost.

However, Kaitlyn again re-works the negative tone to prove a point. She hears the studio owner's daughter and is finally able to put words to the lesson she is trying to teach both her classes. Kaitlyn talks distinctively about what it is she loves about Polynesian dance and what inspires her to "put [her] heart on the dance floor." It's not just teaching or dancing that is important to her. Instead, Kaitlyn is also passionate about the cultural significance of her work and how that makes her feel closer to her family. These specifics help us understand why dancing helps her overcome negative feelings she may have for classwork or lack of sleep. Finally, Kaitlyn suggests that her passion for dance is mimicked by her passion for other things, such as pediatrics. Although the mention is brief, Kaitlyn encourages the reader that dance is just one of the many things she loves and strives to commit her life to.

## Essay: "The Football Experience"
> **Author:** Mitchell Brisacher | **Accepted by:** UC San Diego and UC Santa Barbara
> **Prompt:** Describe the world you come from and how your world has shaped you

THE DIFFERENCES ARE STARTLING even to me, and I lived it. Looking at pictures and video from my smaller, less athletic freshman days of football, I am amazed at my growth. My coaches have molded me into a football machine. I have developed into a vital piece of a CIF championship caliber team, even though I am not the flashiest or the most recognized player in the Windward football family. When other teams scout us, usually I do not come up on their radar. But I am the team's leader and the glue that holds everything together.

My place in the Windward football community is one of fundamental importance. After winning the California Interscholastic Federation Southern Section Football Championship, our leader graduated and the team lacked a figurehead. I filled that role like a linebacker filling a hole. With no hesitation, I stepped up as the team's physical and spiritual captain. From leading pregame rituals, to keeping the intensity up in practice, to making the big play when needed, my teammates turn to me for advice and guidance. Whenever there is a question of the team's direction, the team goes where I guide them.

Another aspect of my leadership is treating every player with respect. Every year I take on the "rookies" (freshmen) and integrate them into the community. I try to mentor them so their transition into Windward football is as smooth as possible. My junior year I mentored a quiet freshman, who started off slowly. By the end of the season, under my guidance, he was a heavy contributor to the team. Now he is also one of my good friends, and we can go to each other for advice because of our close bond.

My freshman year we made it to the semi-finals for the first time in school history. Building on that success, we continued to excel and win the CIF Championship my junior year. I learned from previous years' mistakes to reach the pinnacle my junior year. Instead of ignoring mistakes of the past, I embraced them to better myself, a skill I use regularly.

When the madness and unpredictability of a football game breaks loose, my coaches trust me to lead. I have played every position on the field, from quarterback, to defensive line, to long snapper. My adaptability gives my coaches freedom to move players around, knowing they can ask me to play any position. My adaptability has also transferred to other walks of life, and I carry it with me always.

Being a part of the Windward football family has shaped my dreams and aspirations by teaching me what is possible through hard work. I have learned that I can set my own path and get the success I desire with dedication after seeing how much I have changed while reaching my goals.
