# Personal Growth

## Essay: "Bass Lake"
> **Author:** Amber Fearon | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UC Irvine, UCLA, UC Santa Cruz and UC San Diego

ZOOMING DOWN THE LAKE WAKEBOARDING HAS always been one of best memories of my family's annual vacation to Bass Lake. Unfortunately this summer, my younger cousin, Nick, tried a freestyle jump and his wakeboard gashed his forehead open. I looked back from boat to see blood, mixed with lake water and tears, gushing down side of his face. Without hesitation, I jumped into action. I yelled to my aunt to quickly throw safety flag up and turn boat around, while instructing Nick to grab rope so I could pull him in. Once we got Nick into boat and wrapped in a towel, we raced home, where my aunt immediately rushed him to hospital.

After docking boat and cleaning up Nick's mess, shock of what had happened hit me; I realized how over years my role in our family trips to Bass Lake had clearly changed. Ever since I was three, my dad's side of family has spent this week of summer together, enjoying water sports and each other's company. I started out as a young passenger wedged between two adults, wearing my puffy, yellow life jacket and covered in a mound of damp towels. Without even noticing transformation, I'd grown into a watchful and mature leader, constantly making sure that everyone is safe in water and on boat.

Although I loved Bass Lake as a carefree child, motivated by fun and play, I love it even more as a conscientious young adult. I am able to lead my little cousins by example, and use teamwork with my family to make boating and water-sports safe and enjoyable. By seeing how my family cares for one another, I have learned more about them than I ever thought possible. Having time to relax with my parents removes us from ordinary, busy routine, and has allowed us to become extremely close. Enjoying company of my family while making crafts, talking, and playing in water reinforces our strong family bonds. This Bass Lake tradition has imparted on me vital life lessons, while leaving a lasting fondness for experiences that I know I will share with my own kids someday.

## Analysis
Stylistically, Amber manages to make much of a short answer. She doesn't spend much time in beginning with background, giving just essential setting of wakeboarding. Instead, she begins in media res: Nick is bleeding within first sentences of essay, and Amber is leaping into action with no discussion of forethought or in fact any thought at all. Amber perfectly shows rather than tells how her love for her family, time spent bonding with them and caring for her cousins has conditioned her into becoming, as she says, "a watchful and mature leader, constantly making sure that everyone is safe in water and on boat."

She further stylistically mimics sequence of events by reflecting on event only after crisis has passed and Nick has been rushed to hospital: "After docking boat and cleaning up Nick's mess, shock of what had happened hit me." Amber transitions seamlessly from a display of artistic writing to her critical analysis of incident's effect on her, which allows her to showcase in this essay both her writing skills and her own reflections on her maturation. By time she recalls herself as a "young passenger wedged between two adults, wearing my puffy, yellow life jacket and covered in a mound of damp towels," readers are already drawing a comparison in their mind between young Amber and one we have seen leap into action without hesitation on behalf of her younger cousin.

What's more revealing about Amber is not her responsible reaction to trouble, but fact that she realizes in essay that she prefers spending time with her family in this role to her carefree younger days. Not only, then, does Amber tell us that she is responsible and quick-thinking, but she also prefers to play roles in which she needs to be exactly that. This revelation shows great maturity and great introspection, and Amber makes it clear how her new role as a responsible caretaker in family heightens her appreciation for uninterrupted time she gets to spend with her family on vacation.

Finally, Amber looks to future: superficially describing herself looking after her cousins, she foreshadows herself returning to lake with her own children. But more importantly, she offers sense that she will bring not only her responsible and sensible acumen to other aspects of her life in future, but her power of introspection as well. She covers a lot while focusing on one single but demonstrative event.

## Essay: "Potential to Contribute"
> **Author:** Stephanie Anderson | **Accepted by:** UCLA and UC Santa Barbara as a transfer student

AS OF LATE I HAVE TAKEN great pride in my ability to bridge gap between people, and with this I will try and unify student community at University of California. I am able to relate to people as a result of lessons I learned in time I spent living and traveling abroad, as well as because of my varied interests.

In Spring a couple years ago, I lived in Spain while attending University of Granada. I also travelled around continent, visiting Italy, United Kingdom, Holland, Germany, Hungary, and Czech Republic. While being exposed to different cultures, I also learned to relate to others and to be open to new ideas. I worked to gather some information about people in every country I visited, and tried to pick up basic vocabulary such as "Hello", "Goodbye", "Please" and "Thank You", even in countries where I knew many people would speak English. While I would visit museums and monuments throughout day, at night I would try my best to visit local haunts, in order to see real people at heart of every location, rather than plastic tourist side. These efforts made me aware and considerate of people around me. As a result, I formed lasting friendships with people in various countries.

In addition to what I learned in Europe, I also find it easy to relate to others as a result of my varied interests. I am deeply passionate about a wide array of music, from Blues to Punk to underground Hip Hop. I love film, and I am as entertained at an independent film as well-written Hollywood blockbuster. I am fascinated by art nouveau, I keep updated on politics and world affairs, am a food snob, wine lover, and I will not hesitate to let my inner geek out to play. I enjoy myself if I am outside playing a pickup game of Frisbee, snowboarding, or just running around. On other hand, I will have just as good a time holed up inside just talking with a friend. I can talk sports with boys or drool over shoes with girlfriends. I speak fluent Spanish, poor French, and random bits of Italian, Dutch, Berber, and Czech, and a lifetime of avid reading has resulted in my knowing plenty of odd bits of information.

All of these things have helped me to get along with a wide variety of social groups. This extends beyond people my own age. Anyone who sees me interacting with children tells me I would be a wonderful teacher. On other hand, others are often impressed with how well I get along with adults much older than myself. More than that, I have been able to bring people from different backgrounds together. When I get my friends together, there are people of varying ages, nationalities, and interests. Given chance, I would love nothing more than to demonstrate my gift for communicating with my peers and relating to world around me at University of California. I believe University will benefit from accepting me as those like myself thrive off of other strong, charismatic and interesting individuals. I hope to add flavor to campus body while unifying and expanding it, nourishing myself and those who I am fortunate to meet.

## Analysis
Writing about how you will contribute to a college can be truly daunting. Some students find themselves stumped, unable to imagine what they alone can offer to a campus of thousands, out of a pool of thousands of applicants. Others feel uncomfortable—or far too comfortable—tooting their own horns. In this essay, Stephanie does not offer particularly unique experiences, although hers are broad and varied, nor does she offer a particularly artistic essay, but she avoids common pitfalls of selfishness and self-aggrandizement that this topic can engender, and instead she frames her contribution not in terms of what she herself brings to table but what she can offer to those around her.

In terms of structure, Stephanie keeps it very simple and straightforward. Rather than beginning with artistic anecdotes, flashbacks or some other narrative device, she treats her essay as exactly that—an essay. She offers in her introduction a thesis of sorts: she notes her "ability to bridge gap between people," and posits that "with this I will try and unify student community at University of California." She moves on to explain origins of her ability to mesh comfortably with people from all walks of life, countries and identities, beginning with her extensive travel experience and her unique attitude to travel. She then cites evidence of her ability to move fluidly from disparate groups of people: from underground hip hop fan to snowboarder to wine snob to girly-girl, she offers us an engaging and energetic picture of herself as comfortable in situations that are as diverse and varied as Stephanie's own interests and enthusiasms are. She finishes essay with a concluding argument in which she sums up gist of her essay with a few illustrative examples: "Anyone who sees me interacting with children tells me I would be a wonderful teacher. On other hand, others are often impressed with how well I get along with adults much older than myself. More than that, I have been able to bring people from different backgrounds together. When I get my friends together, there are people of varying ages, nationalities, and interests." Then she finishes on a strong concluding claim: "I believe University will benefit from accepting me as those like myself thrive off of other strong, charismatic and interesting individuals."

Certainly there are more artistic and less direct means of addressing this topic, but Stephanie's forthrightness and simplicity allow her unique and uniquely unselfish take to shine through. Stephanie evokes her varied and wide travels, her knowledge of foreign languages and her long-lasting friendships with people she has met on her journeys not because she can bring these experiences with her to UC campuses and thus enlighten others with her knowledge and wisdom. Rather, she feels that she can facilitate meetings and ultimately friendships between her fellow students who, being inevitably incredibly diverse, may otherwise never have met and thus never been enriched by bonding with people radically different from themselves. Where many students would write only about themselves, it is apparent that Stephanie has at front of her mind welfare and enrichment of community around her: it is not that she herself will be an enriching friend to them—although she likely will—but that she can and wants to facilitate bonds of friendship between people around her. Many applicants have had wide travel experience; many have made lasting friendships with an astonishing array of different kinds of people; many will write more creatively structured essays—but Stephanie is memorable and especially likeable because of generosity, genuine enthusiasm for community and self-effacement without excessive or affected modesty or self deprecation inherent in her argument.

## Essay: "Leave It to Me"
> **Author:** Amber Fearon | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UC Irvine, UCLA, UC Santa Cruz and UC San Diego

OVER LAST FEW YEARS I have babysat to have some extra spending money. As summer after junior year rolled around, I began talking to my parents about my financial situation, including earning and saving money for college. I realized that I had perfect job with families living in my neighborhood. To build my business, I made and distributed fliers, posting them at local elementary schools and community center. Soon after, phone was ringing constantly with neighbors asking me to baby-sit. Before I knew it, my job had expanded to include watching over people's houses, gardens and pets. My baby-sitting job had rapidly evolved from a three family operation to successfully taking care of twenty plus families all over Lafayette. By working hard to be punctual and develop a strong relationship with each family, I was able to strengthen my recommendations and further increase business.

I am incredibly proud that "Leave It To Me", my expanded summer enterprise, became a huge moneymaker in just three short months. Although I have had to reduce my hours while school is in session, I've continued to serve my neighbors whenever my schedules allows. With an extra period free this semester due to district budget cuts, I have been able to realocate more time to my clients and continue to save money for college.

Creating a business taught me about offering a valuable service, setting up right marketing, working hard and managing my time well. I now have a better understanding of importance of saving and budgeting my money. Making my own business took motivation, perseverance and determination in order to keep my connections current and business expanding. Massive amount of time I put in was made worthwhile because I learned important lessons about starting and building a business.

## Analysis
Shorter-answer essays don't allow much room for creativity and artistry, which many students find to be a struggle; at same time, they shouldn't just be a prose version of what's already visible on your application. Amber here manages to successfully communicate what she has learned from her business venture, how it has changed her and how she might apply these lessons to her future, but she manages to tell a story that is organic in its evolution and personal in its details.

Amber begins her narrative with background and inspiration for her business: like many other teens, she babysat, strategized with her parents to earn money and planned how to save for college. But when Amber says "I realized that I had perfect job with families living in my neighborhood," we hardly expect her to launch into her description of what she did to "build my business." This abrupt and unexpected transition communicates Amber's decisiveness and her efficiency, both of which clearly contributed to success of her business. She echoes stylistically rapid growth of her business with ascending list: "Soon after, phone was ringing constantly with neighbors asking me to baby-sit. Before I knew it, my job had expanded to include watching over people's houses, gardens and pets. My baby-sitting job had rapidly evolved from a three family operation to successfully taking care of twenty plus families all over Lafayette."

Amber's attention to detail is not only welcome to reader, making her specific and memorable, but it also serves to suggest yet another reason why Amber's business acumen is so successful. She pays attention to small but important details like punctuality and makes it clear that she puts respectful and accommodating relationships with her clients first.

Amber's summary of what she learned in last paragraph doesn't necessarily include claims of life-changing experiences, but its specificity makes it particularly genuine. She admits that she's pleased that it is a "huge moneymaker," and we appreciate her honesty. "Saving and budgeting," "managing time well" and "offering valuable services" may not be revolutionary discoveries, but their down-to-earth nature and their specificity, as well as Amber's efficient and clipped style, give reader sense that Amber has taken these lessons to heart. Rather than being let down by vagueness of formulaic ending "I learned important lessons about starting and building a business," we get sense from preceding content of essay that Amber genuinely has not only learned these lessons but has applied them successfully to her own life, and will do so to future ventures.

## Essay: "The World I Come From"
> **Author:** Jeremy Press | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley, UC San Diego, UC Santa Barbara and UC Santa Cruz
> **Prompt:** Describe world you come from and how your world has shaped you

THE WORLD I COME FROM HAS been shaped by my connections to people. The people that have impacted me most have been my family, friends, and my baseball team. These people truly make up world I come from. The first group that has affected me is my family. My family has taught me to be hard working without taking myself too seriously. My Mom specifically is always joking around with me and giving me a hard time for being a teenager. For example a few years ago she clipped out an ad from Los Angeles Times that read "Happy Mother's Day! We love you so much. David, Tom, and Annie." My mother crossed out names from ad and wrote Anna (my sister) and Jeremy instead. She then promptly put clipping up on fridge and it remains there today, many mother's days later, stuck behind a magnet in shape of a cow. My parents taught me to be self sufficient. They taught me to be responsible and independent. For example, instead of sticking their noses in my academics, they gave me space with expectation (but not requirement) that I would excel. This has required me to make conscious decision to stay motivated at school and to make my own successes.

My friends are also a very important part of my world. Since entering high school I have become close friends with a group of guys that have impacted my life greatly. Before I got close to these friends I used to feel up tight and anxious during my day. My friends are always helping me loosen during a stressful time in my life. My friends have also taught me to laugh at myself and to see lighter side of things. This is most prevalent right before first period every morning. We congregate outside library to catch up and crack jokes before class. This helps me start my day with right attitude and allows me to focus during class. An example of their impact happened recently during a fifth period English class right before lunch. In middle of our discussion on Hamlet school's fire alarm blasted off and caused me react by jumping in my seat. A few of my friends noticed and we all started laughing in unison. In previous years this would be a very negative experience for me and I would consider classically embarrassing, but what I will remember is joy that my friends and I got out of situation.

My baseball team is also a very important part of my world. Playing on baseball team is where I have learned about commitment and perseverance. I have learned that it is not always about being best but participating in something greater then myself. Our team puts commitment and effort above talent and that has taught me a lot about life. From this experience I know that most important thing is that I feel I have done my best and put my efforts toward an important goal with people that matter to me. I find it interesting that baseball team at my school has more practices than any other team, but also has most fun. The people in my world have taught me that most important thing in life is to do something that you love and to not stop doing it.

## Analysis
Jeremy's essay makes good use of vignettes that bring to life joy of ordinary moments in his life. Humorous tone of essay shows that he has taken to heart his family's advice "not to take himself too seriously" and his friends' positive humor influence. Offbeat example in first paragraph about his mom's appropriated Mother's Day clipping disarms reader with its sheer oddness. Although it may not register on a conscious level, mention of "cow magnet" adds to wackiness of story and demonstrates power of including a well-turned detail. Details like this can add pizzazz to dangerously dull genre of college essay.

Each paragraph in this essay makes its own coherent argument, supported by a relevant incident in Jeremy's life. First paragraph makes two points: author's family taught him to have a sense of humor about himself and to be self-sufficient. The others make one point each, an appropriate level of simplicity for a college essay. Trying to get too many points across can dilute power of a short essay, especially when it becomes impossible to provide effective support for each one. Simple, clear format that Jeremy has chosen allows him to pair a vignette or observation (such as, "I find it interesting that baseball team at my school has more practices than any other team, but also has most fun.") with each major point. By end of essay, reader can piece together points to learn that Jeremy is humble, self-sufficient, able to laugh at himself with friends and committed to his endeavors. Including examples from his home life, social life and an important extracurricular activity makes Jeremy seem well-rounded.

This is a great example for students who worry that their lives aren't "exciting" enough for college essays or who feel like they have nothing to write about. This essay uses everyday events as its raw materials. Jeremy isn't writing about a traumatic life event or a time he climbed Mount Everest, but his essay stands out from pack because it has authentic sound of his own voice. Thanks to that voice, readers finish essay with sense that they have gotten a true glimpse of his personality—and it's an appealing one.

## Essay: "Knowledge is to Know Nothing"
> **Author:** Danish Qasim | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley

THE SUFI MYSTIC IMAM AL-GHAZZALI ONCE wrote that a man can attain half of knowledge by realization that he knows nothing. I came to such a realization one year ago through humbling experience of being stumped by a nine year old girl who asked me a seemingly simple question. She inquired, "If our lives are predetermined by God, why do we have to do anything?" This question could not have come at a better moment in my life as I had just finished giving a presentation on Islam at a local Methodist Church as a part of my outreach organization's efforts to bring religious tolerance in community. Immediately after giving a well received presentation, and after being overcome by feelings of pride and scholarliness, I was forced to reconsider, because little girl's question and my subsequent embarrassment helped me understand point of Imam.

I realized nature of knowledge is comparable to universe, more we learn about it, more cognizant we become of our insignificance within it. I was able to easily answer questions of jurisprudence and scripture, but I had no answer for most relevant question concerning my existence. As a result, I made a commitment to study not just Islam, but a variety of religions. I began intensely studying Arabic language in order to attain a proper understanding of Quran, a scripture of unparalleled linguistic beauty. This increased my understanding of God, as I learned Arabic allows for us to speak about God outside of time, through omission of words such as 'is' and 'was'. My quest has taken me many places from academic institutions such as churches and universities, to places of social consciousness, such as, homeless shelters and orphanages. As a full fledged philomath, I have been enrolled in over ten hours of weekly extra-scholastic classes for past two years, including comparative religion and Islamic apologetics. I have also studied with internationally renowned theologians at famous Zaytuna Institute in Hayward, CA.

I discovered that all religions I studied call people to embrace highest qualities within themselves, such as intellect, and to overcome their lowly aspects, such as greed and envy. This made me realize that religion itself is a beautiful system meant to honor humanity through understanding and tolerance, but it is only its practitioners who give it a bad name.

As a result of my dedication to religious studies, I have gained recognition from my peers. I have been invited by many high school clubs to speak at their events and offer religious guidance to students. Currently, I volunteer as an instructor in a Sunday school, teaching key religious texts to a class of high school students. Ironically, I have found that as my understanding grows, my desire to teach diminishes. Realizing my potential impact on my audience's life, and knowing that an inadequate job can render me a fountain of misguidance, I have begun to exercise extreme caution.

To increase my religious knowledge, I recently went on an exclusive religious and historic retreat to Arabia this summer. I found myself reflecting upon a scriptural passage while reclining in Holy Mosque of Medina, which read, "Everyone will be rewarded with that for which they strived." Over time, this verse helped me realize that although our fate is determined by God, each person must struggle nonetheless to reach his or her full potential as a creation of All-knowing, and I believe that admittance to UC is missing necessary next step in my personal quest for such potential.

## Analysis
Politics and religion are two topics that are very challenging to use in an application essay, as it is very easy for political or religious issues to distract from or overwhelm main subject of discourse: applicant himself. Danish, however, does a good job of using his religious studies and beliefs—very much a central aspect of his identity—to show his dedication to learning, how he self-directs and personalizes his education and how he both learns from and gives back to people around him whether at home, with communities and groups other than his own or abroad.

Danish shows how important Islam is to him by bookending his essay with key religious quotes. Many applicants start an essay with a quote, and so you run risk of sounding formulaic, but Danish immediately personalizes Imam's words by contextualizing them in a singular story showing start of his intellectual and spiritual journey. Anecdote of 9-year-old girl's theological question not only directs Danish's path of inquiry and frames rest of essay, but also gives him a chance to show (not list) qualities about himself: his dedication to religious tolerance and interfaith understanding, his active involvement and ability to give serious presentations, his open-mindedness and respect for inquiry and learning no matter source. By taking 9-year-old Methodist seriously, Danish shows why we, readers, should take him seriously as well.

Danish is not afraid to make "big" statements about life, knowledge and religion, showing he's given serious thought to issues he's exploring, but he also immediately connects those statements to specific examples and steps of his own spiritual and intellectual journey. Not only does he delve deeper into Islam by studying at institutions outside of school, but he also commits to expand his understanding by learning about other religions. On his own he studied Arabic for a better understanding of scripture, but also reveals how another language can influence a worldview just by its structure. Implied throughout his essay is Danish's belief that education and learning are part of daily life and can be found not only in classroom but in church, on streets and everywhere in community.

Danish concludes his essay showing his dedication to pursuit of knowledge—a trip to Holy Mosque of Medina in Arabia—which also concluded and "answered" religious question posed by 9-year-old Methodist at start: in terms of structure essay, and each supporting paragraph, feels "whole" and complete. Danish, however, uses ending quote to go beyond religious to apply it to his character and love of learning as a whole, leaving reader with a sense that Danish will not only take full advantage of all that UC has to offer in terms of academics and community, but that he'll also give back and contribute, improving education of everyone.

## Essay: "Lessons from Sojourn"
> **Author:** Anonymous | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley, UC Irvine and UC Santa Barbara

FOG OBSCURED SAN MATEO SKY, but heat permeated atmosphere. As Nicoleaa spewed antagonistic phrases towards Sophia, smile slipped from Sophia's fragile face. A tear descended down her now pallid cheek. In our lunch group, no voice rose to defend Sophia, not even my own.

Names have been changed.

Later, I realized it had been no different from other confrontations: Sophia was teased, and no one defended her. That night, I remembered a similar story that bore a haunting resemblance to this event.

A month before this encounter, I had unique opportunity to attend Sojourn to Past, a trip retracing footsteps that civil rights pioneers paved during pivotal struggle for justice. During this trip into bloodstained pages of American history, we met Elizabeth Eckford, one of Little Rock Nine, whose fight on frontlines for civil rights left her wounded and scarred, due to taunts from ruthless classmates. Elizabeth's message was simple, her somber words reflective of her repeated mistreatment: "You might be someone's hope someday. You might help someone live another day."

After discerning parallels between torment Eckford and Sophia faced, I began my own sojourn, contemplating how I could fix problems with Sophia. I had been a silent witness, allowing her to fall victim to cruel treatment without defending her. Eckford's story revealed long-term perils of bullying, and I did not want to be a propagator of similar merciless treatment. I now understood that it was not merely aggression by Sophia's adversaries that would scar her; it was silence of her friends, like myself, whose refusal to defend her would hurt her more. No longer could I ignore this injustice. Everyone, including Sophia, deserves to be treated humanely, and have loyal friends who stand up on her behalf.

A few days after this epiphany, Nicole mocked Sophia once again. Instead of ignoring Nicole's diatribe, I stood up for Sophia.

"I am done allowing you to victimize Sophia," I calmly stated, holding Nicole's gaze. "She deserves respect, because she has feelings, too."

Although it has only been six months since learning about nonviolent methods civil rights activists employed to achieve equality and justice, I have carried this newfound determination to defend others into other facets of my life. As a church youth leader, I stress importance of defending those who are taunted. I have led peaceful conflict resolution and anti-bullying classes for children, hoping to motivate silent witnesses to support defenseless. Additionally, I have facilitated presentations for teenagers, where I retell Eckford's story, and convey need to defend those who are abused.

Threading through halls of school, I exchange a friendly "hello" with Sophia and see a face that no longer bears scars of a friendless outcast. Determined to heed lessons I learned from Eckford's story about not being a silent witness, I continue to strive towards guiding others on path of universal acceptance and compassion.

## Analysis
"Lessons from Sojourn" shows a high school student putting her learning into action. It is clear that writer doesn't compartmentalize her education, but rather reflects deeply on what she learns and applies it to her life. She walks us through her thought process as she makes a connection between Little Rock Nine and her own experiences. She unflinchingly confronts her own past mistakes and then takes bold steps to correct them. While other high schoolers might feel that it's enough not to actively bully others, writer can recognize that mere fact of her silence makes her complicit. Her essay is a great example of giving readers an inside look at process of maturing. She vividly paints two scenes of bullying, creating a before and after picture that shows impact she has on her peers. Including a direct quote of what she said to confront bully further makes scene real for her readers.

Not only does writer show maturity, but she shows an unusual commitment to acting on her convictions. Few high school students would be brave enough to stand up to a bully, let alone passionate enough to follow-through on their anti-bullying epiphany to lead workshops for children.

Writer provides a unifying thread that shows underlying motivation between her distinct extracurricular activities. Essay explains that as a church leader, a teacher for children and a workshop presenter, writer expresses her passion for fighting bullying. An essay can be a good opportunity to highlight ties between seemingly disparate extracurriculars. Colleges like to see a strong passion rather than a scattershot approach to extracurricular involvement. In this case, writer is able to make connections not only among separate extracurriculars but also between her personal life, her educational experiences and her activities.

Opening and closing lines are important, and quite noticeable, in a short essay format. Opening of writer's essay is a bit melodramatic, but it does create enough suspense to draw reader in. Likewise, although her final line is overstated—"universal acceptance and compassion" is a pretty ambitious goal—her closing is still a forceful restatement of main thrust of her essay. Keep these basic functions in mind as you write your own opening and closing. An opening should entice reader to continue, and a closing should be a high-impact statement that does not stray from essay's main idea.

## Essay: "My Greatest Fear"
> **Author:** Mitchell Brisacher | **Accepted by:** UC San Diego and UC Santa Barbara
> **Prompt:** Personal quality, talent, accomplishment, contribution or experience

GRAVESTONE UPON GRAVESTONE WITH ROWS AND rows going as far as eye can see—I was standing right in middle of vast expanse confronting "My Greatest Fear." The result was a sextych and a Silver Key.

Although it sounds like plot to National Treasure, where I would have to obtain silver key to unlock Thomas Jefferson's secret diary, in actuality, it was an opportunity to conquer my greatest fear through my greatest passion. Prompt said to photograph my "greatest unease in life, while still revealing tangible and relatable elements of outer being." I could see everyone in class grimace slightly as they felt two-ton ball of nerves and anxiety gather in their stomachs as they thought about their special person, place or idea that personally filled them with terror. I was no exception.

Death: horrible, vile and cold. To capture death's true essence, I took short car drive to Los Angeles National Cemetery, while trying to shake off feeling of dread over entire trip there. Chills tickled my spine as I pulled into parking lot. I turned off car and slowly opened my door. It was a bright and sunny day, but to me it felt like a moonless night on Friday thirteenth because that's sense of doom that fell over me. Sun reflected off marble white gravestones, creating illusion that they went on forever, trapping me in middle of never-ending death.

I jumped right into ocean of death and fully submerged myself in fear. I shot photo project with a friend and a tripod and used self-portraiture to embrace my fear. I got up close and personal to convey my view of bleakness of death. Self-portraiture allows an honest and convincing representation of self, and I was able to immerse myself through it.

After photo shoot, I spent hours poring over chill-inducing images, trying to communicate sense of horror that emerged within me. Using Photoshop as my chosen medium, I enhanced pictures to amplify their power. Tons of photographs ended up on cutting room floor as I searched for perfect image. Pictures I thought were perfect just could not capture feeling that overwhelmed me every time death was encountered. In end, I created sextych, a series of six pictures that work together to increase strength and power of image as a whole.

Result of my internal struggle to overcome fear of death was Scholastic Art & Writing Awards Silver Key for Excellence in Visual Arts. Announcement was made at a school assembly, and I swelled with pride as my photograph was shown on big screen. I had conquered my adversary, and in process, I produced my best photographs to date. Recognition that Award provided proved to me that I could overcome my greatest fear while exploring what I loved. Thanks to my greatest passion my greatest fear, death, no longer fills pit of my gut with cement.

## Analysis
Mitchell opens this essay with a quirky first line that sounds more sci-fi than common app. Once he has captured reader's attention, Mitchell explains premise of essay and describes a challenge he was presented with: "to photograph [his] 'greatest unease in life, while still revealing tangible and relatable elements of outer being.'" By using photography assignment as a frame for piece, Mitchell sets up a clear narrative arc, from receiving an intimidating assignment, to attacking it, to mastering it.

In body of essay, Mitchell vividly conjures up a sense of his fear and dread at confronting death in Los Angeles National Cemetery, using sensory details like "sun reflected off marble white gravestones" to set scene. Mitchell's description of photographic techniques he employed shows his mastery of terms and tools of art form. For instance, he builds credibility when he writes, "Self-portraiture allows an honest and convincing representation of self," and when he describes his decision to create a sextych, a "series of six pictures that work together to increase strength and power of image as a whole."

Reader experiences Mitchell's artistic process along with him, from chilling car ride to cemetery all way through hours spent modifying images using Photoshop. By giving reader a window into his painstaking work, Mitchell communicates his dedication to his project and his ability to stick with it until he achieves best possible result.

Mitchell focuses on personal growth and internal sense of satisfaction that came along with winning an award, rather than on external praise he garnered. Rather than simply being proud to be recognized, he is proud to have successfully used photography to deal with one of his greatest fears. Although it is perhaps a stretch to believe that Mitchell is completely free of his fear of death thanks to this one project, it is nonetheless clear that he has developed a sophisticated understanding of art's cathartic power.

This is a good example of an essay that expands upon an accomplishment that may be listed elsewhere in application but not necessarily given much weight. An admissions officer might read that Mitchell won Silver Key for Excellence in Visual Arts and quickly forget that fact, especially if his or her brain is full of information about other applicants who have also won art awards. Thanks to essay, however, Mitchell can flesh out true meaning of this accomplishment and show not only his technical skill as a photographer but also his capacity for self-reflection as an artist.

## Essay: "A Brutal Blemish"
> **Author:** Brian Tashjian | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley, UCLA and UC San Diego

I COULD NOT FACE MYSELF IN mirror. What used to be a few blemishes on a relatively smooth face had turned into numerous large, painful, red swellings—too many to count. One of them, Everest of this infectious mountain range, had grown to be close to size of an eyeball. Two eyes were enough for me, but Mother Nature had different plans while I spent my six weeks in Central America, with only bacteria-infected water to wash my face. Although it only took a month to develop, physical and emotional consequences that accompanied this breakout of severe acne lasted almost a year. It was stares, double-takes, looks away, even one very blunt person commenting, "Wow, you have really bad acne."

I knew they were not purposefully trying to react, but I saw their expression change nonetheless. But more than reactions from others, what crushed me most were my own reactions. I could not look anyone in eye, afraid of what they might see. I could not look at myself and every time I washed my face, I was reminded that it was more than just visually unpleasant; there was topography. However, despite uphill self-esteem battle, pushing through what I had to face (literally) helped more than it hurt emotionally. I learned a lot about myself and others during that year. My real best friends showed themselves by supporting me through before, during, and after. I learned that even though something may last longer than expected, and even though something may recur more than I feel is needed, I have strength to remain who I am throughout that struggle. Luckily though, struggle ended with introduction of a powerful drug, and light at end of tunnel was a bright one. Without that year-long period, I would not be who I am today; I would not know myself as well as I do. And I definitely would not be as confident going forward in life as I am right now.

## Analysis
This essay accomplishes basic task of an essay on a personal challenge: communicating how that challenge has helped writer grow. Brian communicates what he suffered, but changes direction partway through essay to talk about what he learned from it. He begins with a hook that begs question, "Why?" and encourages reader to read on. From there, he gives a painfully descriptive account of acne outbreak he suffered. Descriptions are creative—"there was topography"—and even show a sense of humor about a very difficult situation—"Two eyes were enough for me, but Mother Nature had different plans." He also recounts reactions he had to face from other people, giving reader a sense of emotional as well as physical consequences of his problem. Perhaps most telling observation in essay is Brian's blunt description of his own reaction to his problem. He is not afraid to confess that outbreak dealt a harsh blow to his self-esteem and ability to interact confidently with his peers. Because he candidly admits how deeply affected he was by situation, his ability to learn from it is all more impressive.

At end of his essay, Brian shows that he had maturity to endure and even grow from this experience. He learned who his real friends were, found unknown reserves of personal strength and became more confident. Readers can tell from his philosophical take on incident that he has maturity to see good and opportunities for growth involved in a challenging circumstance.

If you are contemplating how to write about a challenge in your own life, Brian's three-stage model might work for you: describe problem, outline its implications (especially its effect upon you internally) and then, most importantly, elucidate what you learned from it. Evocative descriptions like Brian's, especially if they reveal maturity and a sense of humor, will be important in exosition section of essay in which you explain problem to reader. Diving into a dramatic aspect of problem with a creative hook will foster curiosity. Vivid descriptions of issue make for good opening sections. Once you have established situation at a basic level and made clear why it was a problem, you can delve more deeply into its psychological and social impacts. In case of this essay, you could think about first section as describing what happened to author's face and second section as describing what happened to his psyche as a result. Finally, and most importantly, offer some sense of self-realizations that came out of situation. This is not to say that you have to turn any negative situation into a positive one, but that your essay should build up to a revelation not just of struggle but ultimately of strength.
