# Talent

## Essay: "Convincing"
> **Author:** Inès C. Gérard-Ursin | **Accepted by:** all of UC schools
> **Prompt:** Personal quality, talent, accomplishment, contribution or experience

I CAN CONVINCE PEOPLE.
I do admit it is not an extraordinary, exceptionally tough skill to acquire: yet I'm good at it. If I have learned anything from cultures I have touched, it is this special power, ability to perceive and adapt psychological and social codes in order to achieve a specific aim.

I was not even fully aware of this until one sweltering afternoon, after several nights of minimal sleep and cafeteria meals, I found myself locked in basement of Arlington Sheraton armed with two pretend legislative wing men, a resolution, and a disarming smile. The three of us represented Russia group at Global Young Leaders Conference held in Washington D.C. and New York during height of summer: although purpose of conference was largely to connect young people from different parts of world, this afternoon our focus was on solving border crisis in Cyprus. We were 45 teenagers in one debate room, all with our own opinions and our own resolutions. As Faculty Advisors set time off for negotiations, our secretary drew a deep shaky breath: "Let's do this."

In 20 minutes I had managed to convince ten countries to sign our resolution, and we were moving into voting procedure. I was still filled with that rush, after effect of single minded, straightforward persuasion, and my limbs were tingling, my heart was racing.

Yet our one opponent, UK, had a similarly determined disposition; facing failure of her own resolution, she vetoed ours. Even still, my greatest sense of accomplishment came when room erupted in passionate cries and accusations: I sat back, satisfied, and enjoyed it. The Faculty Advisors had to send us to dinner; "formal debate" was going nowhere. Later, in meeting with our complete Russia group, we were proud to confirm that we were only delegation that had won a debate, if only "in our hearts."

Ever since, I have become more aware of my love of persuasion, of diplomatic discussion and quick improvisation. Reading people is my skill. Although moving seven times, extensive travelling, being a member of a multicultural family, and attending an International School has strengthened and helped me develop it, I still like to take at least partial responsibility for level of my ability today. In my youth I had to figure out social codes of three countries quickly, and then adapt in order to survive. Now I am just a convincing teenage girl who knows what she's talking about.

I am a dangerous person.
The question is, have I convinced you?

## Analysis
Inès bookends her essay with short, declarative sentences: "I can convince people" and "I am a dangerous person." It's a good strategy for her, since it underscores her ability to get her audience's attention and to boldly make a point—part of what makes her a persuasive person. The essay has style and even sass. Just after Inès gives a litany of experiences that sharpened her ability to read people, veering closer to classic college essay tropes, she firmly asserts her own voice and attitude: "Now I am just a convincing teenage girl who knows what she's talking about." She doesn't sound like a textbook example of ideal college applicant. She sounds like herself—an opinionated, outspoken young woman with a strong sense of who she is and what she can do. Writing a college essay is not about doing your best impression of perfect student. The only voice you can successfully write in is your own, and that's hard enough.

This piece is an example of using a vignette to support an argument. Persuasive essays don't need to be formulaic essay-test style compilations of dry examples that all drive home a single point. As Inès clearly knows, stories can be powerful ways to convince people. The bulk of her essay is a well-evoked scene at a Global Young Leaders Conference. Since she has successfully employed declarative statements in her opening to outline her main points, she does not need to explicitly drive them home while narrating her story. Instead, she uses longer, more detailed and more dramatic sentences to spin a tale that illustrates her love of argument. The story uses details to create an emotional impact. The readers can feel nervousness imbued in secretary's "deep shaky breath" and sense Inès' post-debate exhilaration through her description of her tingling limbs and racing heart.

Perhaps boldest part of essay is closing line. Ending with a rhetorical question is a risky move. The point of a well-placed rhetorical question is to reach out from paper and engage directly with your audience. In hands of unskilled writers, however, rhetorical questions can feel like shortcuts to making an impact. Use them with caution. In this case, question fits essay's sassy tone as well as its content. Inès shows that she's a well-practiced persuader able to use a variety of rhetorical devices.

## Essay: "Cross Country"
> **Author:** Anonymous | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UCLA, UC San Diego and UC Santa Cruz
> **Prompt:** Personal quality, talent, accomplishment, contribution or experience

I AM THE CAPTAIN OF A strange pack of misunderstood athletes: long-distance runners. We hear phrases like, "anyone can run—that's not a sport." Oh it is a sport—just not a sport for weak or weak-minded. Long distance running requires an immense amount of endurance, both physical and mental, because after three miles of thinking, "this hurts," it's very difficult to motivate yourself to run another three. Before high school, I had never done anything athletic. I was a perpetual whiner. By all counts, cross country was not sport for me. And after first day of practice my freshman year, I almost quit. But I had made a commitment, and I was going to stick to it. So I kept coming to practice; even after weeks of dreading end of school day; even after we had our first practice in rain, a day so miserable that drops mixed in with tears rolling down my face; even after I got shin splints, that oh-so-common runner's injury that makes running feel akin to hobbling on two wooden pegs; even then I stuck it out.

And so I got stronger. My body got used to running for an hour without stopping; my mind got used to pain. Practice stopped being absolute torture and started being what it should have been—a workout. And suddenly, after two months, my hard work paid off, and I did unthinkable—I started winning! No longer was running something I just did. It was something that showcased what I could do, what I was truly capable of. As I improved, so did team, and suddenly I had twice motivation—I wasn't just running for personal gain, I wasn't just running for me. I was running because my team, girls who had suffered along with me on those awful days, ones who understood pain and hardship that came with running, ones cheering for me as I crossed finish line, needed me.

This is my fourth year as a member of Cross Country team and my third as a Varsity member. These past seasons have been full of hardships, failures, and breakdowns. But I have also had my share of successes, victories, and moments of pure jubilation. Looking back, I would say that deciding to stay in cross country was one of most significant decisions I have made in my life, because this sport has molded me into person I am today. I have learned how to persevere, and I have seen tangible results of my hard work. I have learned how to persist through pain, how to acknowledge it and then push past it. I have learned how to put aside everything for good of my team, and how this team becomes a family. And from this family I have learned leadership: how to inspire, encourage, support and provide direction.

## Analysis
Every year college and university admissions officers read hundreds of essays that follow this pattern:
I tried out for a sport
I was not good
I hurt a lot
I stuck at it
I got better
I started seeing (especially after one "ah-hah!" moment) sport as an important part of me
The sport has taught me dedication, leadership, teamwork, perseverance, etc.

Creative writers can disguise formulistic aspects of "sports essay" with sensory details showing us world instead of just telling us about it, and then go beyond it by connecting sport to many other topics of interest and experiences that flesh out a well-rounded portrait of writer (see Jackie Botts' "Dance" essay on page 150). Struggling writers follow script listed above.

While it's totally okay to follow pattern—it is, after all, a progression of events and emotions that many athletes have gone through—at least use it, as writer of "Cross Country" did, as an opportunity to demonstrate your writing competence as well as show a side of you beyond just athlete.

Writer immediately defines her sport not only as a physically challenging activity, but as one that requires mental toughness as well. She gives us a portrait of herself before cross country: a whiney couch potato. But we also get a glimpse of some of her core values: "I made a commitment, and I was going to stick to it." (Understandably, universities want students who will finish their degrees). And we see for ourselves that she can write well and show with sensory details: ". . . even after we had our first practice in rain, a day so miserable that drops mixed in with tears rolling down my face . . ."

Writer then expands spotlight of essay to include, not just herself, but her team as well: ". . . suddenly I had twice motivation—I wasn't just running for personal gain, I wasn't just running for me." Universities love to see that applicants value team / group / community as well as themselves, as whole point of attending a university is to actively participate in a community of scholars, athletes and activists, not only during your years of coursework but for rest of your life: people take great pride in saying "I'm a Bruin" or "I'm a Banana Slug" just as much as universities themselves like to boast of their famous alumni.

In her last paragraph writer spells out lessons learned. She saves section from sounding formulaic by using more descriptive diction ("jubilation") as well as artful use of alliteration: "I have learned how to persist through pain, how to acknowledge it and then push past it." She shows that she will be a success in classroom as well as on cross country course.

## Essay: "Stepping onto the Stage"
> **Author:** Amber Fearon | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UC Irvine, UCLA, UC Santa Cruz and UC San Diego

MY HEART WAS BEATING SO FAST it felt as though it was going to burst out of my chest. I could feel my hands becoming clammy and sweat collecting on my forehead. A week earlier one of my friends had asked me if I'd like to sing with his band, CrisP, in our high school 'Battle of Bands'. I jumped at opportunity, forgetting my stage fright and insecurities about my singing abilities. Now all of a sudden I found myself holding a 'mike' center stage. I looked across grassy field to see my fellow classmates, teachers, and parents waiting for us to start. Gripping microphone tightly, I began to sway to beat of "Coastin'" by Zion I. The first piano chords drifted into audience and beat of drums matched rhythm of my heart. I looked over at my fellow singer, Nicole, for reassurance, but all I saw was confusion. She tapped her microphone, but there was no sound. The chorus was quickly approaching, and all of a sudden I was facing a solo, instead of rehearsed duet. I took a deep breath to steady myself. I shut my eyes for a second, and went for it. As song ended, I glanced into crowd of staring faces; there was dead silence. My heart tightened at thought of failure, but then crowd erupted into cheers. With relief, a huge grin spread across my face—I had done it! In a flash ballots were tallied and I joined my band members, as we crossed our fingers in anticipation of announcement. Our band's name was called! We had taken first place and our week of intense practice had paid off.

I was overjoyed by our win, until I heard that our prize was chance to perform in front of entire school. My heart dropped once again, but this time I had experience and confidence to stand in front of my classmates and sing out. I knew what I could do if I challenged myself. After singing in front of school, I realized truth in this quote: "To laugh is to risk appearing fool...To place your ideas, your dreams before crowd, is to risk their loss . . . To live is to risk dying...To try is to risk failure. But risks must be taken; because greatest hazard in life is to risk nothing" -Anonymous.

While I've had confidence in areas such as running for captain of my soccer team, maintaining good grades and welcoming new students to campus through New Crew, I've always been shy in choir. Instead of auditioning for a solo or lead role in school musical, I've volunteered to work behind scenes. However, after revealing a different side of myself at Battle of Bands, I gained self-confidence and pride in my musical abilities and learned benefits of taking risks. Now I want to challenge myself further with solos in choir, memberships in new clubs and different events track and field events. I've always realized that through hard work I can achieve my goals, but singing in Battle of Bands has taken that understanding to a new level. This newfound confidence has made me see world in a new light, and realize that opportunities are open to me if I try.

## Analysis
Amber begins in middle of her anecdote, letting her reader feel almost as alienated as she does as she says, "My heart was beating so fast it felt as though it was going to burst out of my chest. I could feel my hands becoming clammy and sweat collecting on my forehead." Details, from sweat on her forehead to name of song and band, add to scene's vividness. Her style is peppered with short sentences that build on each other: "I jumped at opportunity, forgetting my stage fright and insecurities about my singing abilities. Now all of a sudden I found myself holding a 'mike' center stage," for example, or "The chorus was quickly approaching, and all of a sudden I was facing a solo, instead of rehearsed duet. I took a deep breath to steady myself. I shut my eyes for a second, and went for it. As song ended, I glanced into crowd of staring faces; there was dead silence." This cadence propels reader inexorably towards chorus, end of song and even band's win.

But Amber's essay isn't just showcasing her style and artistic writing, nor is it a self-aggrandizing account of how great her band was. She surprises us by telling us "I was overjoyed by our win" and then saying, "until I heard that our prize was chance to perform in front of entire school." Amber's admission of shyness and nervousness is particularly striking not only in light of her huge success that she has just related, but also because it makes preceding anecdote all more poignant. Amber makes readers understand just how high stakes were for her, and just how transformative her success was.

Amber may be doing herself a disservice by, rather than describing this transformation in her own words, using quote to do it for her. But she has very clearly demonstrated dramatic risk she took in front of crowd, and, with her effusive style in describing her band's win, she clearly communicates joy and self-confidence she derives from having taken that risk far outweighs her fears.

Honesty and vividness with which Amber portrays her fears allows her to fill this essay with her successes in music, in sports and in school without sounding too self-aggrandizing and without being off-putting; Amber is clearly reflecting on a major concern in her life, rather than contriving a weakness in order to sound more modest. Her focus on a single event and anecdote, too, makes it clear how extensive her fear was and how important overcoming it was. Finally, she ends on an encouraging and uplifting note but avoids sounding too canned by including specifics: "Now I want to challenge myself further with solos in choir, memberships in new clubs and different track and field events." Amber avoids making extravagant claims and sticks to specifics, which in fact heightens personal nature of her essay and brings her very vividly to life in mind of reader.

## Essay: "Dance"
> **Author:** Jackie Botts | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley, UCLA and UC Santa Barbara
> **Prompt:** Describe world you come from and how your world has shaped you

I WAS FOUR WHEN I TOOK my first dance class. At eight, I discovered ballet was more than pliés and tutus. As my teacher played a sweet melody, I began to dart around room like a hummingbird I had seen in our garden. For first time I realized that through movement, I could represent ideas and express emotions. I was just beginning to fall in love with ballet, unaware that world of dance—its intense classes and euphoric performances, purpose and awareness of a step thoughtfully executed—would come to define my own world.

By freshman year I was consumed. When asked what I wanted to be, I relished surprised expressions at my response: a ballerina. A friend asked if a student as focused as I shouldn't dedicate her life to something more academic—wouldn't I prefer thinking to moving?

I was learning, however, that thought is what elevates movement into an art form. In English class, I read Siddhartha, who taught me to walk more slowly and breathe more deeply. Siddhartha lived so purposefully; he would spend hours by a river, eliminating external distractions as he turned his mind inward. In ballet class, I stopped relying only on mirror, instead tuning my mind to my body. How would Siddhartha dance? was a slightly comic yet fascinating question. Meanwhile, in physical therapy for several injuries, I realized that I could no longer "just dance through pain," but that a dancer must be intelligent about her body. Like Siddhartha, she must be aware and move with purpose.

A year later, as I prepared for Biology Subject Test, concept of awareness took on a more complex meaning. With my hefty prep book propped up on my stomach, rising and falling with my breath, I read about alveoli in my lungs and about my stalwart heart, which relentlessly propels blood cells and oxygen through every part of my body. Like many dancers, I had often pushed my body beyond its limits, ignoring its signals as I strove for unattainable perfection. Biology taught me that I must not separate my mind from my body; two must work in tandem.

These ideas converged when I read Annie Dillard in junior year English. Dillard writes, "Today...you know you're alive. You take huge steps, trying to feel planet's roundness arc between your feet." What awareness, what purposefulness one would need to sense curvature of earth as one walked! What if I could dance like that? What if I could know my body with such wakefulness; aware of every muscular function, of biological processes fueling each movement? And what if I could define concept behind each step I executed so deliberately that others would experience dance as acutely as I do?

Then, I think, I might be a true artist.

Over past few years, several injuries have led me to give up my dream of becoming a professional ballerina, yet dance remains my passion and lens through which I view world. Regardless of what I study or what career I pursue, I will approach each challenge ahead of me as I would any dance—with intention and dedication, mindful of each step. I will endeavor to feel curve of Earth beneath my feet and I will strive to encounter others with clarity and honesty. When I dance, I am aware and charged with purpose, and that is how I intend to live.

## Analysis
Eyes travel like fleeting feet over Jackie's essay as we slip on her shoes and follow her steps as she discovers dance, links it to literature and then absorbs it into her present and future self. By using her dance experience and development as her central conceit (main idea), Jackie provides her essay with a strong framework that allows her to flow effortlessly from step to step, from topic to topic, and to connect her various interests and evolving worldview within a cohesive and "complete" composition. Remember that application readers pour over hundreds of essays, many poorly or formulaically written, and so presenting a well-crafted portrait that's easy to read singles you out and casts a bright, positive light on you. Jackie's essay, with its tightly-woven structure, sentences that flow in a graceful rhythm of short and long and astute personal reflection, is, at very least, a joy to read.

Each paragraph clearly advances a new idea, aspect or evolution while seamlessly flowing from previous and on through following. Jackie's intro is also her introduction to dance, and we feel her child-like joy as well as her adult apprehension as she foreshadows how overpowering a part dance would become later in her life. The reader also, at this point, gets worried that this will be another "Sports taught me dedication and perseverance" essay that focuses more on sport / activity than applicant.

Notice, however, how Jackie uses her friend in second paragraph to set up real thesis of her essay: "I was learning . . . that thought is what elevates movement into an art form." She then spends next three paragraphs showing her evolving worldview by giving concrete examples of how she applied other studies to her understanding of both her dance and herself. Reading Siddhartha led to inward reflection (cleverly contraposed with symbol of dance studio mirror that showed only physical appearance) and thus awareness of self. The biology textbook, both its content and physical mass, gave Jackie a better understanding of her body and how to be mindful of seeing corporal and cerebral as a whole. And reading Dillard expanded her focus beyond horizon—a literal worldview—to come to an understanding of art and life as empathy.

Jackie ends her essay by tying all earlier threads together to present a complete portrait of herself, using strong declarations of her matured identity and applying all that is "dance" to all other aspects of her life. Admissions officers, in addition to being pleased at reading well-written and well-structured essays that flow, love to see how an applicant has reflected on personal experiences, how those experiences contribute to person she is today and how she will use them to face challenges ahead. "Aware and charged with purpose" is a great last phrase to leave in reader's mind and connected to your name.

## Essay: "Just One More"
> **Author:** Jaime Copprell | **Accepted by:** UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UC Irvine, UCLA, UC Riverside, UC San Diego, UC Santa Barbara and UC Santa Cruz
> **Prompt:** Personal quality, talent, accomplishment, contribution or experience

IT WAS A LOVE-HATE RELATIONSHIP. MY heart struggled at times to maintain pace, but I nonetheless thrived from strength it gave me each day. For past three years, my involvement in Cross Country has allowed me to test my endurance, and on numerous levels, to dig deep for reservoirs of strength I never knew I possessed. Most people do not find running miles on end to be very appealing, but to me, it is a revitalizing pastime I am proud to call my own.

Preparation for races and daily practices were often exhausting and at times disappointing, but despite such difficulties, it was feeling of overcoming adversity that I loved most. For reasons beyond my control, I have experienced three significant changes in my coach each year; I had to adjust to new techniques, expectations, and coaching methods. Though I knew it would take some getting used to, it was a challenge I was willing to face. Adapting to this change ensures me that I am capable of withstanding any unexpected obstacle life may throw at me.

Aside from overcoming these changes, I anticipated races most. To me, racing was not about defeating my opponents, but rather an opportunity to test my will to succeed under unimaginably difficult conditions. This created an inner-drive that motivated me to do my best in classroom, at home, and most importantly, as a person. And in racing, it all came down to myself and what amount of pain I was willing to endure and still be able to walk away knowing I gave it my all. Whether I ran race of my life or suffered an unexpected defeat, I could always count on my team to support me. In these three years, I have had privilege of having a very supportive "second" family. And to this day, I still thrive on motivation my teammates have given me and lessons my coaches have bestowed on me.

My very first coach once told me that in races, "Think of it as being your last—your only—and all you need is just one more." I never got to asking him what he meant by "just one more," but I perceive it as being a reason to not give up. I have just one more mile, one more step, one more chance to seize everything I ever wanted. Whether I nailed his interpretation correctly or not, I do not plan on changing my own. This is who I have become and in my life, I am in a race to succeed—to reap every learning opportunity available. And I am stopping for no one.

## Analysis
Jaime uses her involvement with cross country in order to discuss how she is able to overcome challenges. In UC experience essay, it is important for students to show not only what they've accomplished, but also what challenges they faced and how they dealt with these challenges. Jaime successfully does this by discussing physical and mental challenges she faced while on her school's cross country team.

First of all, Jaime notes that physically, cross country tested her endurance and physical strength. This is commendable, but it's also true for most high school athletes involved in competition. Therefore, instead of spending time talking about being physically tested, Jaime turns focus towards her unique experience. Jaime had to adapt to three different coaches over course of her high school career. On surface, having three coaches doesn't seem like a particularly important detail. Yet, Jackie notes that changes in coaching staff also meant adapting to "new techniques, expectations, and coaching methods." In this way, Jaime illustrates unique challenges she faced, communicating to audience types of adversity she is capable of overcoming. Still, Jaime could have taken some time to explain specifically how she adapted to changes coaches made her make. This would have given us a greater understanding of how Jaime uses her own skills to adapt to novel circumstances.

Similarly, Jaime notes that she overcame "unimaginably difficult conditions" while racing. Again, Jaime's ability to overcome these challenges is impressive, yet there are no specifics to what "unimaginably difficult conditions" means. Was it physical pain, mental conditions, weather? Specifying conditions she faced would have given reader a clearer picture of range of difficulties Jaime was able to overcome.

It's important that Jaime is specific about what she is capable of, because she relates her ability to overcome obstacles in cross country to her ability to face difficulties in other aspects of her life. If Jaime is specific about what mental barriers she can surpass during racing, then we can predict sort of psychological challenges she might be able to overcome at school. We can see effectiveness of this tactic when Jaime describes her admirable personal qualities. For example, Jaime talks about finding satisfaction in a race even when defeated. This shows humility. Likewise, Jaime's acknowledgement of her team's support illustrates her ability to fit into a community and thrive in an environment where she must work with others.

Final paragraph at last gives reader insight into Jaime's thought process. We see Jaime take words of her coach and give them her own meaning. This shows that Jaime is attentive, looking for ways to become inspired. This interpretation informs us what Jaime aspires to do. She encourages herself to grab every opportunity she can, pushing through every last step as if it's last one she can take to succeed. Jaime thus proves that she will actively take advantage of all opportunities that college may have to offer her.
