# Travel

## Essay: "Defining Moments"
> **Author:** Shelby Newallis | **Accepted by:** UC San Diego and UC Santa Barbara
> **Prompt:** Personal quality, talent, accomplishment, contribution or experience

PEERING OUT OF THE SHUT WINDOW of an overcrowded bus, veering towards edge of cliff, I honestly feared for my life. Previously, I had never thought about my last moments, and as I reflected about various people and experiences, I found myself praying, "Please God, I'm not ready yet. I'm sorry that I don't pray often, just not yet, not now." It was during that treacherous excursion along winding roads of Italian coastline that I pondered relevance of my existence: Who am I really? What has my life been truly about? Has my life actually been fulfilling?

Though it may sound like a cliché, my life has changed from that day. No, I did not go through a complete transformation in forty-five minutes from Salerno to Atrani, but this potentially fatal incident catalyzed an internal cultural renaissance. I have had some time to think about what motivates, excites, and inspires me. Coming to realization of my strong ties to my Italian heritage, specifically language and culture, I will continue to study Italian and strive to master this romance language and rich culture so that I may share this passion with others. Studying and speaking Italian satisfies my true love for learning and experiencing, which is insatiable.

Life experiences help to define a person and as I enter adulthood, this realization is very apparent. Traveling abroad and meeting new people have taught me that all people possess innate qualities that positively affect others. Sitting with a couple of friends playing cards on patio of our hotel in Sicily, I saw Salvatore, our bus driver on tour. He was standing against wall smoking a cigarette looking over at us as we were laughing and playing cards. Obviously, language barrier excluded this seemingly interesting man from joining us. After impulsively inviting him to sit with us, I taught him how to play Speed, an American card game. At all times he waited patiently while I tried to communicate in Italian. From this experience I learned a valuable life lesson: we all need to recognize and appreciate gifts of others, while remembering to reciprocate by sharing our gifts. While I discovered Salvatore's gift of patience, I quickly discovered my own too, that of making others feel comfortable and welcome.

I have been so fortunate to live a life full of memorable experiences by traveling, spending time with family, and meeting new people, like Salvatore. These past experiences have now only intensified my thirst for learning new languages, discovering new cultures, and more importantly being able to experience uniqueness that all people have to offer.

## Analysis
A near-death experience is one way to start your essay with a bang. In "Defining Moments," Shelby makes a great connection between content of her essay and its setting. It's fitting that her moment of soul-searching on a lurching bus took place in Italy, because result of her soul-searching is realization that she is passionate about Italian culture. Shelby coins a memorable, pitch perfect phrase, "internal cultural renaissance," to describe her epiphanies.

Some other aspects of Shelby's second paragraph should be examined. If, in an essay, you find yourself writing, "Though it may sound like a cliché," odds are that it is a cliché and you should avoid it. Statements like, "my true love for learning and experiencing, which is insatiable" are more general. After all, most applicants to a good college probably have a passion for "learning and experiencing." 

Essay picks up steam again when Shelby relates another vivid anecdote, this time about an external interaction as well as an internal realization. She reveals her uniquely welcoming instincts by relating how she reached out to her Italian bus driver. Not only that, but she acknowledges with grace and humility that credit for this positive interaction goes as much to driver as to her. The story is a great choice for a college essay, because it allows her winning personality and kind heart to shine through. It also gives a concrete example of why she loves learning Italian and types of positive experiences that language and cultural fluency make possible.

Shelby manages to communicate both her academic passions and her personal qualities, all while keeping essay tight by centering it on a trip to Italy. In brainstorming ideas for your own essays, consider listing moments in your life in which you demonstrated your best self. Like Shelby's card game, they can be small moments. The important thing is that they show something about who you are that differentiates you from pack. It's an added plus if you can relate that unique quality to your academic interests or what you can add to a campus.

# Vignette

## Essay: "The World of Bus Stops"
> **Author:** Inès C. Gérard-Ursin | **Accepted by:** all of UC schools
> **Prompt:** Describe world you come from and how your world has shaped you

MY WORLD IS THE WORLD OF bus stops. Early mornings, long afternoons spent dreaming, watching sun's rays warm spots of dew through enchanted mist. I dream of transcribing every scene into my journal, of making time stop so I can breathe in landscape and cement feeling of wonder in my being. I live for those quiet moments of beauty at bus stops.

At one of last assemblies before summer break, I remember a student comparing our school to a train station, with people forever coming and going, or stopping to stare into space for a little while. Sometimes I speculate whether comfort I find from buses are from their lack of permanence, fact that they are not in one set position, but going from one place to another, and that I can just relax in this state of transience. I am moving on to something better, and am happy with exactly where I am.

It was not always so: long ago in my first year facing a new public transport system, I managed to extend a 20 minute ride home to four hours. Taking three buses, a tram, and finally a taxi in Norwegian winter darkness, I stumbled through front door exhausted, having used up all my money on payphones and having spent all my energy staggering around in huge ski boots. Similarly, first time we moved to Norway I spent weeks stumbling through idioms and childish rhymes, but as I have grown to learn how to use public transportation system, so have I learned to slide back into Norwegian culture, and I feel like a fully integrated Norwegian-American-Belgian member of society. In period of social adjustment, all is doubt and experimentation, but once I figure things out I am ready to set off and pursue my ambitions.

But, right now, bus windows are so dirty they close us off from outside, they make world inside an isolated gold orb, filled with platinum blonde hair buns, small heart tattoos, baseball caps and baby carriages. Everything besides here and now ceases to exist, life stops for a moment and my dreams duplicate and mutate to fill every empty seat. The clear voice of a British political commentator, jangling through my headphones, fills air and drowns out all distractions with its righteousness, and I glance up through tales of Republican nominees to catch a brief glimpse of clear blue, rose-rimmed sky.

Is it weird to feel that I am flying?

On bus rides I gather hope, I harness ideas, vitality, energy, for moments when I step off. Staring out windows of this metal beast, I have realized some of my greatest hopes. I wish to speak for those who cannot, to use all that I can to accomplish good in world, I wish to have a direct say in political legislation, and I wish to help others see beauty, see happiness, in own mundane elements of their lives. I would like to save someone with my words.

Life is a dream until we pull up into station, and I put away my headphones and glimpse a friend through dirt-crusted windows. Then, it is time to make all my wishes come true.

## Analysis
Inès starts off with a simple yet resounding opener that states a direct answer to prompt. From outset, she combines vivid imagery about her experience on buses with profound reflections expressed in phrases such as, "sometimes I speculate whether comfort I find from buses are from their lack of permanence" and "I am moving on to something better, and am happy with exactly where I am."

Essay isn't all poetic evocation and philosophical musing, however. Inès also disarms reader with a humorous peek into her first stumbling Norwegian bus ride. She shows that she is capable of writing at a high level and of analyzing her life deeply but also includes this humanizing vignette. Details of story that she provides help readers identify with her and her predicament. It's hard not to feel sympathy for her when you picture her wearily trudging around an unfamiliar place in her "huge ski boots." purpose of story isn't to seek pity, but rather to show how far she has come and to underscore her ability to adjust to new situations.

Inès cleverly segues between buses and her career interests by mentioning political commentary she listens to on her rides. It becomes clear in her final paragraphs that she is interested in politics and that she has identified her own facility with words. Yet she is smart not to commit herself to any particular career too definitively. It isn't necessary to give exhaustive specifics about your future plans in a college essay. Since many students change their minds over course of their four years in college, it can even be counterproductive to come across as dead-set on a single path. Sounding too decided can come across as naive or even disingenuous. You don't want to give impression that you have prematurely narrowed your interests or, worse yet, to seem as if you are merely telling admissions officers what you think they want to hear. Some students may be tempted to avow a definite commitment to a particular career path out of a fear of sounding aimless or indecisive. By contrast, Inès shows that she has put careful thought into what she cares about and what skills she has to offer, but avoids painting herself into a corner by over-committing to a defined plan.
