# Vignette

## Essay: "The World of Bus Stops"
> **Author:** Inès C. Gérard-Ursin | **Accepted by:** all of the UC schools
> **Prompt:** Describe the world you come from and how your world has shaped you

Inès C. Gérard-Ursin
Accepted by all of the UC schools
Essay prompt: Describe the world you come from and how your world has shaped you
MY WORLD IS THE WORLD OF bus stops. Early mornings, long afternoons spent dreaming, watching the sun’s rays warm the spots of dew through enchanted mist. I dream of transcribing every scene into my journal, of making time stop so I can breathe in the landscape and cement the feeling of wonder in my being. I live for those quiet moments of beauty at bus stops.
At one of the last assemblies before the summer break, I remember a student comparing our school to a train station, with people forever coming and going, or stopping to stare into space for a little while. Sometimes I speculate whether the comfort I find from buses are from their lack of permanence, the fact that they are not in one set position, but going from one place to another, and that I can just relax in this state of transience. I am moving on to something better, and am happy with exactly where I am.
It was not always so: long ago in my first year facing a new public transport system, I managed to extend a 20 minute ride home to four hours. Taking three buses, a tram, and finally a taxi in the Norwegian winter darkness, I stumbled through the front door exhausted, having used up all my money on payphones and having spent all my energy staggering around in huge ski boots. Similarly, the first time we moved to Norway I spent weeks stumbling through idioms and childish rhymes, but as I have grown to learn how to use the public transportation system, so have I learned to slide back in to Norwegian culture, and I feel like a fully integrated Norwegian-American-Belgian member of society. In the period of social adjustment, all is doubt and experimentation, but once I figure things out I am ready to set off and pursue my ambitions.
But, right now, the bus windows are so dirty they close us off from the outside, they make the world inside an isolated gold orb, filled with platinum blonde hair buns, small heart tattoos, baseball caps and baby carriages. Everything besides the here and now ceases to exist, life stops for a moment and my dreams duplicate and mutate to fill every empty seat. The clear voice of a British political commentator, jangling through my headphones, fills the air and drowns out all distractions with its righteousness, and I glance up through tales of Republican nominees to catch a brief glimpse of clear blue, rose-rimmed sky.
Is it weird to feel that I am flying?
On bus rides I gather hope, I harness ideas, vitality, energy, for the moments when I step off. Staring out the windows of this metal beast, I have realized some of my greatest hopes. I wish to speak for those who cannot, to use all that I can to accomplish good in the world, I wish to have a direct say in political legislation, and I wish to help others see beauty, see happiness, in the own mundane elements of their lives. I would like to save someone with my words.
Life is a dream until we pull up into the station, and I put away my headphones and glimpse a friend through the dirt-crusted windows. Then, it is time to make all my wishes come true.
 
ANALYSIS
                   Inès starts off with a simple yet resounding opener that states a direct answer to the prompt. From the outset, she combines vivid imagery about her experience on buses with profound reflections expressed in phrases such as, “sometimes I speculate whether the comfort I find from buses are from their lack of permanence” and “I am moving on to something better, and am happy with exactly where I am.”
                   The essay isn’t all poetic evocation and philosophical musing, however. Inès also disarms the reader with a humorous peek into her first stumbling Norwegian bus ride. She shows that she is capable of writing at a high level and of analyzing her life deeply but also includes this humanizing vignette. The details of the story that she provides help readers identify with her and her predicament. It’s hard not to feel sympathy for her when you picture her wearily trudging around an unfamiliar place in her “huge ski boots.” The purpose of the story isn’t to seek pity, but rather to show how far she has come and to underscore her ability to adjust to new situations.
                   Inès cleverly segues between buses and her career interests by mentioning the political commentary she listens to on her rides. It becomes clear in her final paragraphs that she is interested in politics and that she has identified her own facility with words. Yet she is smart not to commit herself to any particular career too definitively. It isn’t necessary to give exhaustive specifics about your future plans in a college essay. Since many students change their minds over the course of their four years in college, it can even be counterproductive to come across as dead-set on a single path. Sounding too decided can come across as naive or even disingenuous. You don’t want to give the impression that you have prematurely narrowed your interests or, worse yet, to seem as if you are merely telling admissions officers what you think they want to hear. Some students may be tempted to avow a definite commitment to a particular career path out of a fear of sounding aimless or indecisive. By contrast, Inès shows that she has put careful thought into what she cares about and what skills she has to offer, but avoids painting herself into a corner by over-committing to a defined plan.

## Analysis

